Spee Morty 

b 66800080 LOZ € 

| | 

4D3ITIOO §, TAVHOIN ‘1S SO ALISHSAINN 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D. 
e 

EDITED BY 
| ¢T. E. PAGE, c.u., urrr.p. 
E. CAPPS, px.p., 1.p. W. H. D. ROUSE, rirr.p. 
L. A. POST, ».a. E. H. WARMINGTON, ».a. 

ar pe, 

‘\ 

ARISTOTLE 
GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

PLAMI“A FOS i 

ARISTOTLE 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
A. L. PECK, M.A., Pu.D. 

FELLOW OF CHRIST'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND 
UNIVERSITY LECTURER IN CLASSICS 

LONDON 

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
MCMXLUI | 

Va HOUTA ae HRY nes 
x ‘ . ¥ A : 

a al 

> 
ye 
J er 
es, See 
Pa ie fe a 
ks Pay OF a) 
ois ‘ 
at - = 
wl 
‘ 
PZ 4 
i. a a ae = 
e a, 8 Ao 
; : 
} 5 + 
2 5 a 
‘ a 2 
%. 7 e , { 
5, Fi e's 4 
: . vous 
; t 
' 

“T  Oft ORAMEAIT ORE 
VERE REA OT ERNE: 

eed YP aiavIey AE ot 

Printed én'G@réat Britain 

} : we "5 ae 

PREFACE 

In reviewing Karl Bitterauf’s book? in 1914, H. Stad- 
ler ® described the Generation of Animals as “ this still 
inadequately appreciated work of Aristotle’s,’’ and 
it must be confessed that his description is not yet 
out of date. It has, perhaps, been more appreciated 
by men of science than by scholars and philosophers ; 
but it has a strong interest for both classes of students. 
Its neglect by scholars and philosophers ° is the more 
surprising, since it may, I think, be justly claimed 
that in this treatise Aristotle’s thought is to be seen 
integrated as it is nowhere else ; for in reproduction, 
as understood by Aristotle, not only the individual is 
concerned but the cosmos at large : it is a business 
in which the powers of the universe are concentrated 
and united; and it is the means whereby that 
eternity, with which, if he could have done it, God 
would have filled the whole creation from one end to 
the other, is attained so far as is possible by the 
creatures that are subject to decay ;. indeed, these 
very beings, animals and plants,’ have in Aristotle’s 
view the best claim to the title of “ being” (ovc‘a), 
a much better claim than the lifeless things out of © 
which they are composed, or the objects made by 
human art; and therefore they merit to an excep- 
tional degree the attention of the student of reality. 

® Der Schlussteil der aristotelischen Biologie; see below, 

p. XXv. 
® In Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift (1914), p. 833. 
* Among the less learned, however, the outstanding 
achievement of Aristotle in this branch of study has been 
for at least the last three centuries acknowledged by the 
title of the popular handbook known as Aristotle’s Master- 
ce. 
@ Aristotle’s strong interest in plants is shown by the large 
number of references to them in G.A.; see Index. 

v 

Aristotle’s 
zoological 
works. 

ARISTOTLE 

Perhaps philosophers, like the visitors who came to 
call on Heracleitus and found him in the kitchen, 
have felt embarrassed at finding Aristotle in his 
laboratory, and have thought it more dignified to 
wait until he came out; failing to perceive that 
‘there too gods are present.” * And where the gods 
are, there too is beauty, however mean and however. 
small the creature may be which is the ‘subject of 
study—greater beauty than is to be found in the 
products of human skill ; for these are the workman- 
ship of Nature, who does nothing idly or without 
purpose ; and in them too is to be found the activity 
of Soul, working through its instrument pneuma, 
which is the terrestrial counterpart of the celestial 
“ quintessence,”’ aither, the divine constituent of the 
heavenly spheres and of the stars ; in them, therefore, 
Form at its highest and Matter at its highest are seen 
operating in unison. For men of science, the Genera- 
tion of Animals has a special interest, in that it is 
the first systematic treatise on animal reproduction 
and embryology, containing records of observations, 
marking out schemes of classification, and suggesting 
methods of dealing with problems, much of which has 
proved of permanent value ; indeed, Aristotle’s work 
was not resumed until after the lapse of nearly two 
thousand years, and some of his observations were 
not repeated until comparatively recent times. Of 
this I shall have more to say presently. 

ARISTOTLE’s EMBRYOLOGY 
The De generatione animalium is the culminating 

@ See P.A. I, 645 a 20 ff. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

portion of Aristotle’s zoological works, of which the 
scheme may be exhibited as follows : 

I. ‘Record of observations. 
Historia animalium. 

II. Theory based upon observations (including. also 

many observational data). . .. “2 
_.. (De partibus treating of the “ matter.” _ of 
( , | animalium animals and the way in which it 
De incessu is arranged to subserve their 
animalium various , purposes 5 i.e., their 
i “parts,” excluding those used 
MP? in reproduction. 
(b) De anima treating of the “ form ”’ of animals 
hit —i.e., Soul, padbiitedTi parted’ se 
functions. - 
deg rps naturatia y eating of the functions “ common 
(c) + De mot to body and Soul,”. excluding 
| eeteaviisth | reproduction. 

(d) Degeneratione treating of the “parts”’ used in 
animalium reproduction, and of the repro- 
ductive’ functions (which are 
common to body and Soul). 
The section (5) is necessary to the completeness of 
the scheme, but as it has given rise to a whole depart- 
ment of study, it is usually treated apart from the 
rest. Thus the main bulk of the zoological and 
biological works may be taken to consist of the three 
great treatises H.A., P.A. and G.A.* It was these 
which, through Latin translations made from the 
Arabic, were restored to the West by those who 
revived scientific studies at the beginning of ‘the 13th 
century. 
It is generally held that the zoological works were Date of 
written during the second period of Aristotle’s £27?" 

s tion. 
* For abbreviations, see p. lxxvi. 
Vii 

ARISTOTLE 

residence at Athens, when he was engaged in organiz- 
ing systematic observation and specialized research, 
which produced, among other results, the collection 
of 158 constitutions of states (of which the Constitution 
of Athens, recovered at the end of the 19th century, 
is one), as well as the Historia animalium.* The 
zoological works have not been subjected to such 
minute criticism as, for instance, the Metaphysics and 
Politics, but, according to Jaeger, the H.A. shows 
clear traces of different authors, and he suggests that 
the work of observation was distributed among several 
persons from the outset. It is probable that some 
collection of material was madéby Aristotle himself ? 

_ between the two periods of his residence at Athens. 

Aristotle's 
method. 

But the real importance of these works is that they 
represent the first attempt in Europe to observe and 
describe in a scientific way the individual living 
object. , . 
Aristotle’s method may be described as substanti- 
ally the same as that of modern scientific workers : 
it is inductive-deductive, as opposed on the one hand 
to earlier (and later) methods of pure deduction from 
a priori premisses, and on the other hand to the 
Baconian method of almost exclusive induction. 
Aristotle often complains that his predecessors’ work 
was marred by insufficient observation, and the 
importance which he himself attached to careful and 
thorough observation is apparent throughout the 
zoological treatises. Of particular interest in this 
connexion are his observations of the viviparous dog- 
fish (Mustelus laevis), observations not repeated in 

“ See W. D. Ross, Aristotle, and W. W. Jaeger, Aristotle. 
» See D. W. Thompson, prefatory note to translation of 
H.A.,, p. vii. 
viii 

| ete RY eS CM mame: <im- r ey 

Ol ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

modern times until the seventeenth century,* and 
his knowledge of the hectocotylization of one of the 
tentacles in the Octopus; the problem involved in 
the latter case has not yet been solved. Other 
problems raised by him have found their solution 
only in very recent years; among them may be 
mentioned the breeding of eels and the anatomy of 
the hyena.” His discussion of the reproduction of 
bees is a remarkable piece of analysis ; and here. 
again the facts are not yet fully ascertained. It is in 
connexion with this problem that Aristotle makes his 
well-known dictum: “ But the facts have not yet 
been sufficiently ascertained ; and if at any future 
time they are ascertained, then credence must be 
given to the direct evidence of the senses rather than 
to theories—and to theories too provided that the 
results which they show agree with what is observed.” 
This, indeed, is the principle upon which his work 
is based; and although he is often forced to rely 
upon bare theories, it is only because he was unable 
to obtain experimental data—most insects, he regret- 
fully remarks, are too small to be observed—in other 
words, it is only because he lacked the necessary 
apparatus. For his magnificent apologia (if such it 
can be called—protreptic would be a better word) on 
the subject of the study of natural history, the reader 
should refer to the passage in the first Book of the 
De partibus (ch. 5). Nevertheless it is probable that 
his theories, though they sometimes led him astray, 
did in fact often help him to adopt a correct general 
outlook, even if the detailed working out of them is 

* By Nicolaus Steno (1638-1686); although the facts were 
not widely known until the work of J. Miiller in the 19th 
century (see 754 b 33, n.). > See p. 565. 

ix 

Aristotle's 
contribu- 
tions to 
embryo- 
logy. 

ARISTOTLE 

erroneous. As examples of this we may quote his 
discussions and conclusions upon preformation and 
epigenesis and upon the time of sex-determination 
in the embryo.? bed 
The main contributions of Aristotle to embryology, 
as judged from the viewpoint of a modern embryo- 
logist,’ may be stated as follows : . | Litt 

1. Following the lead of men like the author of the 
Hippocratic treatise 7. yovjs, Aristotle greatly 
extended the field of careful and accurate obser- 
vation, and was thereby enabled to introduce 
for the first time the comparative method into 
embryology, and so to arrange the available 
data in an orderly wav This is expressed, e.g., 
by his classification of animals according to their 
methods of embryonic development. ' 

2. He stated in the clearest terms the two rival 
theories of preformation and epigenesis, and 

_ decided in favour of the latter. He also laid 
down that the sex of the embryo was deter- 
mined at the very beginning of its development. 

3. He clearly stated that generic characteristics 
precede specific characteristics in embryonic 
development, and, by his theory that the various 
faculties of Soul developed successively in the 
embryo, foreshadowed the modern theory of 
“ recapitulation.” By his observation that the 
“upper ”’ parts of the embryo develop more 
rapidly than the “ lower ”’ parts he foreshadowed 

* For a useful general estimate of Aristotle’s work, see 
E.S. Russell, The Interpretation of Development and Heredity 
(1930), pp. 11-24. 

» Boe. e.g., J. Needham, A History of Embryology (1934), 
pp. 36 ff. 

x 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

~ the modern doctrine of “ axial gradients ”’ (see 
' 741 b 28, n.). 
4. He correctly understood the functions of the 
‘placenta and the umbilical cord and 
5. He prefigured (see 772 b 13 ff.) with wnstidetbel 
insight the cell-streams or morphogenetic move- 
ments which are fundamental in embryonic 
development during the period when the germ- 
layers are taking up their definitive positions.* 
His dynamic view of the origin both of normal 
structures and of monstrous deviations can be 
fully appreciated only in the light of modern 
knowledge of the great part played by move- 
ment, migration of cells, etc., in early embryonic 
development. ’ 

On the contrary side we must range such mistakes 

as these : 

1. The insect larva, which Aristotle regarded as the 
earlier stage of an egg, “ an egg laid too soon,” 
has in fact passed the embryonic stage. 

2. Observations of newly-castrated animals led him 
to regard the testes as of secondary importance. 

With regard to his famous doctrine that the male theory ot 
supplies the Form and the female the Matter of the form snd 
embryo (see 729 a 11), some misunderstanding may repro- 
easily arise. And also, with regard to his insistence ““““°™ 
upon the importance of the Final Cause, we find that 
modern scientific opinion, following the. lead of 
Francis Bacon, who led the attack upon Formal and 
Final Causes, often tends to consider Aristotle’s talk 

* See J. Needham, Biochemistry and Morphogenesis (1942), 
where also the most modern views on the origin of monsters 
will be found. On this subject, C. Dareste’s Production 
artificielle des monstruosités (1877) i is still the classical work. 

xi 

ARISTOTLE 

about these Causes as inferior to what he has to say 
on other matters. It is, however, open to question 
whether Aristotle would in fact have reached some 
of his most valyable conclusions apart from his insist- 
ence upon the pre-eminence of the Final Cause (any 
more than Harvey might have discovered the circula- 
tion of the blood unless he had tried to discover what 
was the Final Cause of the valves in the veins) ; and 
although Aristotle was of course ignorant of the 
existence of spermatozoa and of the mammalian 
ovum, and although he considered that the menstrual 
fluid was the ‘“‘ matter ”’ out of which the embryo was 
formed, it is not so certain that he was quite as 
wrong-headed as he is often said to be. 
Before coming to a conclusion, we must consider 
what exactly Aristotle meant by Form and Matter 
in this connexion. In the first place, we must realize 
that the Form is not bare Form, nor is the Matter 
bare Matter : this, indeed, is a fundamental doctrine 
of Aristotle. Form is not found apart from Matter 
(that was a Platonic view)! nor is Matter found which 
is not to some extent “informed”; and Aristotle 
can say (end of Met. H) that Matter in its ultimate 
stage is identical with Form (see Introd. § 17). At 
any rate, the Matter with which we are concerned in 
the generation of animals is far from being “ un- 
informed.” Like the “ residue ’’ contributed by the 
male, the “ residue ” contributed by the female is 
** coneocted blood ” ; and, since blood is the “ ulti- 
mate nourishment’ which maintains the upkeep of 

* Discovered by K. E. von Baer; there is a complete 
facsimile of his fundamental memoir De ovi mammalium et 
hominis genesi (Leipzig, 1827) in Sarton’s Isis, XVI (1931), 
315 ff. 

xii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

the body and its parts, both “ residues ” are potentially 
the body of a living creature of the same kind as that 
which produced them. Indeed, the only important 
difference between them is one of the degree of 
“concoction ’’ which they have undergone, for the 
female; whose vital heat is weaker, cannot carry the 

* concoction ” of blood as far as the male can. But 
the female’s “ residue ’’ (viz., the menstrual fluid) is, 
potentially, all the parts of the body ; and hence, too, 
it is, or contains, Soul potentially (this is merely 
another way of saying the same thing, because just 
as any actual living body must possess Soul, which is 
its Form, actually, so a potential living body must 

Soul potentially). That the female’s “ re- 
sidue ” does in fact possess Soul potentially is shown, 
says Aristotle, by the occurrence of wind-eggs in 
birds : these possess nutritive Soul, and up to a point 

grow and “are fertile... The Matter, therefore, 
is “ informed” to a high degree ; and the only part 
of the Form which it lacks is sentient Soul. Hence, 
the meaning of the statement that “ the male sup- 
plies the Form ”’ can only be that the male supplies 
that part of the Form known as sentient Soul : every- 
thing else, including nutritive Soul, can be, and is, 
supplied by the female. 

We may now go on to consider the “ residue ” 
contributed bythe male. Aristotle, as we saw, held 
that Form is not normally found apart from Matter 
(t.e., body) of some sort,* and besides that, according 

® See Introd. § 42. An exception is rational Soul, which 
is not the Form of any body (§ 44), but this is a separate 
question, and in any case affects man only. We must also 
except the 55 immaterial unmoved movers, which Aristotle 
posits in the Metaphysics (1074 a) to account for the moye- 
ments of the planets. 

eas 

ARISTOTLE 

to him, action can only be exerted, change can only 
be brought about, by something that can come into 
contact with another thing. Therefore in any case 
something corporeal must be supplied by the male as 
well as Form, and this is of course the substance which 
carries the (potential) Form : it is the substance with 
which the sort of Form known as Soul is specially and 
regularly connected, and in which it resides, viz., 
connate pneuma. This pneuma, which is thus present 
in the semen, is charged with the “ movements ”’ 
- proper to Soul, including (in the case of the male) the 
““ movements ”’ proper to sentient Soul; and these 
“movements,” when given the right material to 
work upon (viz., material which is potentially an 
animal of the right kind) and the right conditions, are 
able to produce an animal of the same kind as that 
which they would have produced or maintained in the 
male parent even if the blood in which they were 
originally present had not undergone the further 
stage of being concocted into semen. 

Hence it is clear that fundamentally the oontriba: 
tions of both parents in generation are identical ; 
both are potentially a living animal of a certain kind, 
and this involves that both possess the living animal’s 
Form, viz., its Soul, potentially ; and the only differ- 
ence between them is that the male’s contribution 
possesses also sentient Soul potentially. 

At the same time, this is an important difference, 
and makes itself apparent in the difference of bulk 
between the two: the female’s is large in bulk, the 
male’s is small. And this difference of bulk is 
accounted for by the fact that the female’s is less 
“ concocted ” than the male’s—it is less concentrated. 
Further, the only Matter that the semen need con- 

Xiv 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 
tain is a sufficient amount to transmit the “ move- 
ments ”’ to the female’s residue, and once this has 
been done—that is to say, once the embryo or rather 
its heart has been “ constituted,’ once. it has been 
given its “ principle ’’ and has the power to grow— 
then the “ body ”’ of the semen can “ evaporate,’ for 
the Matter which provides the embryo with its 
wherewithal for growth is of course supplied by the 
female parent. 3 : 

As a final word on the subject we may recall that, 
in addition to what we have already found Aristotle 
saying about the identity of Matter and Form in the 
long run, he finds no greater difficulty in identifying - 
vos with Matter than he does in identifying it with 
Form or with the Motive Cause and the Final Cause 
(see Introd. § 14, end); and when all the attributes 
have been ascribed to Matter which Aristotle ascribes 
to it in spontaneous generation (see App. B § 17, 
additional note), there is very little more left for it 
to desire. 

I have not thought it necessary to call attention to scope of 
all Aristotle’s mistakes, partly because of lack of ‘s edition. 
space, but chiefly because it would serve no really 
useful purpose. Nor have I given an account of 
modern embryological theory. My main object has 
been to ensure that the reader shall be able to find 
out what Aristotle said, and to secure that Aristotle 
shall get neither credit nor discredit for things which 
he did not say. Ina treatise such as G.4., this means 
that fairly copious footnotes are necessary,? and as a 
further help to the reader I have provided not only 
a full account of Aristotle’s technical terms (which 
gives an opportunity for explaining a good deal of the 

@ See also p. xxxiv. 
b XV 

ARISTOTLE 

framework of his thought), but also, in the Appendix, 
accounts of his theory of the universe and movement 
(without which parts of Books II and IV cannot be 
understood) and of the functions of Lvurov Ivedpa,* 
an essential factor in his doctrine of generation. On 
Aristotle the principle that, for the most part, Aristotle is his 
his own . F 
interpreter, OWN best interpreter, these accounts are compiled 
almost entirely from passages taken direct from 
Aristotle’s own treatises. 1 
Aristotle’ | _In reading Aristotle’s scientific works, it is important 
predeces- : 
sors, NOt only to recognize how great were the advances 
which he himself made in natural history, both in 
practical observation and in theory, but also to re- 
member that his work was a continuation and an 
expansion of what had been begun by previous 
scientific workers. Those to whom he most fre- 
quently refers by name are three: Anaxagoras, 
Empedocles, and Democritus, besides several refer- 
ences to theories which can be traced in the 
Hippocratic treatises ©; and the fact that he often 
quotes them in order to disagree with them should 
not lead us to underrate their achievement. It is not 
possible here to give any adequate account of these 
predecessors of his, and for details about them the 
reader must be referred to the standard works on 

@ The doctrine of XII was older than Aristotle (see Jaeger ; 
references given Introd. § 46, n.), but in this volume I am 
concerned only with Aristotle’s presentation of it. 

» Aristotle calls them collectively dvoxoi or gduaoddyor, 
‘“* physiologers,” i.¢., writers on ‘ Nature,” “ natural” 
scientists. See 741 b 10, n. 

© There are also, of course, references to theories stated by 
Plato, to which attention is called in the notes ; but Plato is 
not mentioned by name. See also K. Prachter, Platon 
Prdformist ? in Philologus, LX XXIII (1927), 18-30. 

Xvi 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

the early scientists and philosophers and to other 
works of reference. Alcmeon, to whom also he - 
refers, is an important figure, since it was he, ap- 
parently, who originated the famous doctrine of 
“ passages ”’ (or “ pores,’ zopor) in connexion with 
sensation, and held that the brain was the common 
sensorium, in which belief he was followed by Hippo- 
crates and Plato, whereas Empedocles and Aristotle 
reverted to the older view that the heart is the central 
organ of sensation. Alcmeon also treated systematic- 
ally of the special senses, in particular that of sight. 
Other theories of his mentioned by Aristotle may be 
found by reference to the Index. 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, the last great name in 
the Ionian philosophic succession of Asia Minor, is 
well known for his theory that vois is responsible for 
the order of the universe as a whole, just as it is for the 
order which is to be discerned in living creatures, 
and for his remarkable theory of matter, which he 
constructed specially with a view to accounting for 
generation and growth. I have treated fully of this 
elsewhere.” 

_ Empedocles of Acragas, a striking figure, was a 
_ slightly younger contemporary of Anaxagoras, and 
_ was renowned as a politician, religious teacher, 
_ rhetorician, philosopher, and physician: he was the 

* e.g., J. Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy; see also for 
_Hippoerates, W. H. S. Jones (Loeb ed.); for Alcmeon, 
J. Wachtler, De Alemaeone Crotoniata (1896); and M. 

| Wellmann, Die Schrift x. ips vosoou, in Archiv f. Gesch. der 

Med. XXII (1929), 290-312. For a conspectus of ancient 

embryology, H. Balss, Die Zeugungslehre u. Embryologie in 

_ der Antike, in Queillen u. Studien zur Gesch. der Naturw. 
u. der Med. V (1936), 193-274. 

> €.Q. XXV (1931), 27 ff., 112 ff.; see also G.A. 723 a 7. 

Xvii 

ARISTOTLE 

founder of the “ Italian ” school of medicine. Con- 

‘ siderable portions of his poems on Nature and Purifica- 

Dates. 

tions are extant. He adopted, perhaps formulated, 
the doctrine of the four Elements, which really means 
(see w. dpyains intprx7s, chh. 13 ff.) that he selected, 
as especially important, four out of the many sub- 
stances already recognized as fundamental in tradi- 
tional Greek medical theory (see Introd. § 24). 

Democritus of Abdera, the follower of Leucippus, is 
best known for his advancement of the atomic theory 
originated by his master. Abdera is not far from 
Aristotle’s birthplace, Stageira, and Aristotle seems 
to have been specially interested in Democritus.” 

The following table will indicate roughly the dates 
of these early scientists : . 

Alemeon of Crotona, probably a Pythagorean and a 
pupil of Pythagoras himself (he was “ a young man 
in Pythagoras’ old age’). Pythagoras is said to 
have gone to Italy in 529 n.c. and to have lived at 
Crotona for twenty years. Alemeon was probably 
active, therefore, about 510-480. 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae. Born about 500 B.c., 
died 428. Lived at Athens c. 480-450, and was 
a friend of Pericles. Mentioned by Socrates in a 
well-known passage in Plato’s Phaedo. 

Empedocles of Acragas (Agrigentum) in Sicily ; 
c. 494-434. 

Democritus of Abdera in Thrace ; ¢. 460-370. 

4 For further details about Democritus, see C. Bailey, The 
Greek Atomists and Epicurus. 

» According to W. A. Heidel, however, Hippocratic Medi- 
cine (1941), 43, and American Journal of Philology, UX1 
(1940), 3 ff., Alemeon’s floruit should be put considerably 
later, say at 450 B.c. 

XViii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

It is not possible to assign exact dates for all the 
treatises in the Hippocratic collection ; indeed they 
cannot all be ascribed to a single author, but one of 
the most important, the 7. dpyains intpixijs, refers to 
Empedocles as having introduced new-fangled ideas 
into the long established science of medicine (ch. 20). 
Other treatises relevant to our subject are the z. 
dépwv dddrwv térwv, the 7. diaitys, and the z. yov7js 
kai 7. dvows waidiov. All of these are most in- 
teresting and will repay study. The last named in 
particular is the work of a most active’ and enter- 
prising man, always ready to experiment and to 
record his results and to make use of them. 

It should of course be remembered that although 
Aristotle introduced much new technical terminology 
and sometimes gave new content to what already 
existed, many of the terms which he uses were the 
common property of scientific writers, among them 
being such important ones as the following :_divvayus, 
Kpaois, TYVTHY "a, TvppeTpla, efdos, rvedua and the like. 
I have attempted to trace the development of one 
such term in my account of Svvapes (Introd. §§ 23 ff.). 

It is not possible here to say much about Aristotle’s 
successors, but it is necessary to say enough to 
emphasize the important influence which they have 
had in the history of science. Hieronymus Fabricius 
ab Aquapendente (1537-1619) knew and admired 
Aristotle’s work on embryology, and what is more, 
himself carried out further important observations 
on the same subject. His brilliant successor, William 
Harvey (1578-1657), was a student of Aristotle, and 
much of his inspiration came from Aristotle’s works. 
Harvey was indeed the first to make any sub- 
stantial advance in embryology since Aristotle him- 

xix 

Termino- 
logy. 

Aristotle's 
successors, 

ARISTOTLE 

self. In other departments of study, however, 
during the 17th century, the authority of Aristotle 
and the scholastic doctrine with which he was 
identified were being combated in the name of 
“ freedom,” and so it came about that the zoological 
works too, which had been brought to light by the 
“ dark ” ages, were allowed to pass back into oblivion 
by the age of enlightenment. It was not until the 
end of the 18th century that they were rediscovered 
for the second time by Cuvier (1769-1832) and mem- 
bers of the Saint-Hilaire family. 

Earty TRANSLATORS 

Karly Lack of space forbids reprinting here the account 

translators. which I gave in the Introduction to P.A. of the 

fascinating history of the early translators of Aris- 

totle’s zoological works, and I must be allowed to 

° refer the reader to that volume (pp. 39 ff.) for details 

and other references. A mere list of the four most 
important translations must here suffice : 

(1) The physician Ibn al-Batriq translated the 
H.A., P.A. and G.A. into Arabic at Bagdad 
during the time of the Caliphate of al-Mamun 
(813-833), son of Harun al-Rashid. There is 
a os. of an Arabic translation, probably Ibn 
al-Batriq’s, in the British Museum ¢ ; and there 

« B.M. Add. 7511, 13th-14th century (=Steinschneider 
B.M. 437). Ihave seenthis ms. Judging from the passages 
which Dr. R. Levy kindly read for me in this ms., Scot's 
Latin version is a close translation from the Arabic. This is 
confirmed by the fact that the contents-preface which is found 
prefixed to Scot’s translation corresponds exactly with the pre- 
face which precedes the Arabic version in this ms. (see B.M. 
Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum orientalium, p. 215). 

XX 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

can be little doubt that this is the translation 
from which Michael Scot made his Latin 
version. 

(2) Michael Scot translated H.A., P.A. and G.A. 

‘into Latin from the Arabic at Toledo. This 
translation was finished before 1217. 

(3) William of Moerbeke translated the zoological 

- works into Latin from the Greek, at Thebes, 
in or before 1260. 

(4) Theodore of Gaza began at Rome in 1450 to 
make translations of Aristotle and other Greek 
authors. His translation of the zoological 
works of Aristotle is dedicated to Pope Sixtus 
IV, and this soon became the standard Latin 
version. It is printed in the Berlin edition of 
Aristotle. 

Tue Text 

It soon became clear that for the purpose of transla- Method. 
tion it was necessary to make a working version of 
_ the Greek text, and to this end I made my first draft 
_ with the Berlin edition, Aubert and Wimmer’s edition, 

and Platt’s translation and textual emendations be- 
fore me. Next, I transcribed suspected passages with 
_ their contexts from the mss. of Scot’s version, in order 
_ to give them fuller consideration. Then, having in- 
_ corporated a large number of changes into the text, 
some of them my own, I took into consideration the 
_ work of Bitterauf and others. In some cases I found 
_ that the same emendation had been proposed by two 
_or more scholars independently, and also that some of 

these emendations were confirmed by Scot. Finally, 
I found it necessary to transcribe further portions of 
Scot’s version. 

pa 

Xxi_ 

Apparatus 

criticus. 

Arrange- 

ment, 

4 
Manu- 

scripts : 
(a) Greek 
text. 

ARISTOTLE 

I do not wish to claim more for the text here-offered 

than that it is a better text than any hitherto avail- 
able. I have done my best with the data at my 
disposal, but I am well aware that many passages 
yet remain to which I have not been able to offer any 
satisfactory solution. 

When I have accepted the reading of Bekker’s 

edition, I have not normally given the yss. variants. 
These will be found in Bekker’s apparatus. Corrected 
reports of mss. readings as given by Susemihl and 
Bitterauf I have distinguished by an asterisk; the 
other readings are as reported by Bekker ¢ (some- 
times confirmed by Bitterauf). Every departure 
from Bekker’s text is recorded. 

The text has been reparagraphed throughout, and 

in many places the punctuation has been corrected. 

The following manuscripts ° are cited for the Greek 

text : 

Oxoniensis Collegii Corporis Christi W.A. 2. 7 
(=Coxe 108). Late 12th century. Presented to 
the College by Henry Parry, Fellow, in 1623. It 
contains P.A., I.A., G.A., some of the Parva 
Naturalia, and De spiritu. G.A. begins f. 747, and 
ends f. 161", but this page is identical with 62°. 
The ms. is confusedly bound, and some passages 
it has lost altogether.° 

Laurentianus Mediceus 81, 1. Written in differ- 
ent hands, some of the 12th, some of the 13th 

* A few (for m and E) are as reported by Bussemaker. 

> For further details, see Bitterauf (below, p. xxv), Ditt- 
meyer, H.A. (Introd.), Jaeger, M.A. and I.A. (Introd.), ete. 

© 738 b 1 BeAz[iovos . . . 740 a7 70] yevopevov; and 760a 13 
mws [) yeveots . . . 760 b 27 pev| eAarrw, the latter passage 
having been supplied by a later hand. 

xXxXill 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

century. G.A. is written in a 12th century 
hand. 

P Vaticanus graecus 1339. Great variation of 

- opinion upon the date of this manuscript has been 
expressed by various scholars. Some date it 12th 
century, others 15th. 

Y Vaticanus graecus 261. 14th century (Btf.). 

The following are cited for a few places only : 

m Parisinus 1921. 14th century. In this ms. G.A. 
is accompanied by the commentary of Michael 

of Ephesus. 

OP Riccardianus 13. Late 14th century. 

E Parisinus regius 1853. Written in various hands, 
from 10th to 15th century. G.4. is in a 15th 
century hand. 

The following manuscripts of Michael Scot's trans- () Michael 

lation are to be found in this country : ce 

Cambridge, University Library li. 3. 16. 

Cambridge, University Library Dd. 4. 30. 

Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College 109. 

Oxford, Merton College 278. 

Oxford, Balliol College 252. 

London, British Museum Royal 12. C. XV. 

London, British Museum Harl. 4970. 

All these are of the 13th or 14th century. I have 
seen all these mss. of Scot’s translation, but chiefly 
owing to present conditions I have worked with the 
two first mentioned only.* 
The chief mss. cited by Bekker for G.A. (namely, The text: _ 
PSYZ) are identical with four of the six cited by him {),Bek¥ers 

® Lists of mss. of William of Moerbeke’s translation will be 
found in G. Rudberg, Textstudien zur Tiergeschichte des 
Aristoteles (1908), and L. Dittmeyer (see below, p. xxix). 

xxiii 

ARISTOTLE 

for P.A.t Some years ago, when working on P.A. for 
the Loeb edition, my examination of the ms. Z at 
several places led me to state (P.A. Introd. p. 46) 
that a more reliable collation of the chief mss. than 
Bekker’s apparatus criticus afforded was clearly 
needed. This view is amply confirmed by K. E. 
Bitterauf, who has in fact undertaken such a collation 
for G.A. (see below), and he shows that there are 
several errors and misleading reports on every page 
in Bekker’s apparatus. 
()the A comparison of the text of P.A. exhibited by our 
manus PY Greek mss. with the translation of Michael Scot 
showed me that the former had all suffered identical 
corruptions or losses (or both) in certain passages 
(e.g., P.A. 684 b 22 ff.), by which the Greek ms. from 
which Scot’s Arabic original was translated had not 
been affected ; and I found exactly the same when I 
came to work on G.4A. (see, e.g., 722 a 20, 766 b 35). 
My conclusion about the common origin of our Greek 
mss. is also supported by Bitterauf, who comes in- 
dependently to the conclusion, based exclusively 
upon a study of the Greek mss., that they are all 
derived from a single archetype, which, in his opinion, 
contained a number of variant readings. 
Modern ‘This brings us to a consideration of the ms. tradition 
work on of G.A. After the publication of Bekker’s Berlin 
edition in 1831, very little work was done on the mss. 
of G.A. for about eighty years. Bussemaker, who 
edited G.A. in the Didot edition (Paris, 1854), cites 
many readings from the two Paris mss. E and m, and 
several times quotes the authority of William of 
Moerbeke, less frequently that of Michael Scot, and 

@ Of the other two, U does not contain G.A., and in E 
G.A. is written in a later hand. 

XXiv 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

in a few cases quotes their Latin versions. Aubert 
and Wimmer, in their Leipzig edition published in 
1860, took into account throughout the commentary 
of Michael of Ephesus and Gaza’s Latin translation, 
but they too relied upon Bekker for the ss. readings. 
The first to go back again direct to the mss. was F. 
_ Susemihl,* at whose request in 1885 Bywater and 
_ Vitelli inspected a number of selected places in 
_ Aristotle’s zoological works in the ss. Z and S respect- 
ively, and of these fourteen are places in G.A. The 
majority of these, however, are of minor importance. 
_ Areally serious attempt to revise the text throughout 
on the basis of a new collation of the Mss. was made 
_ about 1913 by K. E. Bitterauf in preparation for a 
_ new Teubner edition, which however was never 
_ published.’ In all, Bitterauf enumerates 31 Mss. 
containing G.A., and of these he collated three in full 
himself from photographs (Z, Y and E), and a single 
_ selected Book (not the same Book in each case) in 
eight more (of which m was one). He also had at 
_ his disposal collations of seven others, of which five 
were apparently collated direct by Hugo Tschierschky 

* Kritische Studien zu den zoologischen Schriften des 
Aristoteles, in Rhein. Mus. XL (1885), 563 ff., and a very 
convenient summary of his proposals there made in Bursian, 
4 XLII, 245 f. 

_® But he published some of his results in two preliminary 
, Brepect : (1) Der Schlussteil der aristotelischen Biologie : 
eitrdge zur Textgeschichte und Textkritik der Schrift ** De 
‘ Sencrabone animalium.”’ (Wissenschaftliche Beilage zum 
ahresbericht des kg]. humanistischen Gymnasiums Kempten 
fiir das Schuljahr 1912/13). Kempten im Allgiu, 1913. 
(2) Nene Textstudien zum Schlussteil der aristotelischen Bio- 
logie. (Ibid., 1913/14.) Kempten im Allgau, 1914, These 
are the source of the readings recorded throughout the text 

_where they differ from Bekker’s apparatus. 

xXXV 

ARISTOTLE 

(these include S and O?, and another ms. called 8 
which contains only a very small part of the begin- 
ning of G.A.) and the remaining two (one of which is 
P) were collated by L. Dittmeyer from photographs. 
Five others were collated (apparently from photo- 
graphs) by Bitterauf sufficiently to establish their 
character ; of the remaining eight he gives no report 
on the character of their text. The upshot of 
Bitterauf’s work is to show that Bekker was right in 
basing the text upon PSYZ, and that although the 
most faithful witness to the original text is Z, with 
P a good second, no as. has a monopoly of the truth, 
since their common descent gives them all a fair 
chance of preserving a good reading, just as it has un- 
doubtedly ensured, as I mentioned above, that they 
have all failed to preserve the text in certain passages. 

With regard to the defective nature of Bekker’s 
apparatus, the corrections which Bitterauf gives are 
of value primarily in determining the comparative 
trustworthiness of the mss. rather than in yielding 
substantial improvements of the text*; but there 
are a good many places where they do make an 
improvement possible, and all the suggestions which 
Bitterauf makes for so doing I have carefully con- 
sidered, and many I have adopted. When the 
changes indicated are of a minor character, for 

« Examples are: 718 a 36, Bekker’s app. atrais Z, 
actually atrais SZ; 719 a 31, Bekker’s app. évrds, 7a 8 €xrds 
Y, but actually PZ. Bitterauf had access to Bekker’s own 
copy of the Basel Aristotle (1550), and shows that some of 
Bekker’s errors are due to his having used one set of symbols 
for the mss. in his collation and another set in his apparatus. 

® It should be remembered that Bitterauf’s pamphlets are 
merely “ foretastes *’ of his projected edition, and therefore 

the list of passages dealt with by him cannot be treated as 
exhaustive. 

XXVI 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

instance those affecting merely the order of words, I 
have not always felt it necessary to alter Bekker’s 
text, though it might be held that ceteris paribus Z’s 
_ reading should be preferred. 

Bitterauf does not appear, at any rate from what 
he has published, to have envisaged the existence of » 
deep-seated corruptions or serious losses from the 
text. The furthest he ventures along this path is to 
suggest that aiva and cdp€ should be written twice 
instead of once at 722 b 34, and that «ai @owv has 
dropped out at 746 a 34; but the latter suggestion, 
which is certainly right, is taken over from Busse- 
maker. However, that loss of phrases.and corrup- 
tion of the text have occurred is sometimes clear 
from intrinsic evidence, and loss can sometimes 
be proved by the survival of the original words in 
M. Scot’s translation. 
Apart from re-examination of the mss., proposals to Conjectural 
improve the text by conjectural emendation have *™™s##"- 
been made by the following : 

(1) Wimmer, who was responsible for the textual 
work in Aubert and Wimmer’s edition of 1860, 
made a number of conjectures, some of which he 
incorporated in the text and others he printed 
in the footnotes. Many of them are undoubtedly 
correct, and some I have found are supported by 
Scot (though I have no reason to think that 
Wimmer himself was aware of this). 

(2) F. Susemihl,* beside the work which he did on the 
Mss., dealt with the question of duplicate recen- 
sions in the text, and also that of interpolations 

® Rhein. Mus. XL (1885), 563 ff. 
XXVvii 

ARISTOTLE 

by commentators, and made a number of con- 
jectural emendations. | 
(3) Arthur Platt, in his translation of G.A. in the 
Oxford Translations of Aristotle, published 1910, 
suggests a number of emendations, many of which 
have been adopted in the present text ; and some 
of these, again, I have found to be confirmed by 
Scot’s translation, though Platt himself was un- 
aware of this. Platt also detected many corrupt 
places and misplaced passages or interpolations. 
(4) Bitterauf himself puts forward about ten con- 
jectural emendations in addition to his other 
suggestions for improving the text, but few of 
them are of major importance. 
A few suggestions for emendation were made by : 
(5) H. Bonitz,* en passant, as asides to his treatment 
of passages in other works of Aristotle, and by 
(6) H. Richards ®; some of these will be found re- 
corded in their proper places. 

Single small emendations are proposed by M. 
Hayduek ° and E. Zeller. A few are proposed by 
H. Diels and one by W. Kranz.*° J. G. Schneider, 
too, in his edition of H.A. (1811) made some sugges- 
tions for improving the text of G.A. based partly on 
the Latin versions, but most of his work is superseded 
by Bekker’s edition, Some passages are also dis- 
cussed by J. Zahlfleisch./ 

« Aristot. Studien (1866), IV. 363, 378, 413. 

> J. of Philology, XXXIV (1918), 254. 

° Emendationes Aristoteleae, in Neue Jahrbiicher f. Philol. 
u. Paédagog. CXIX (1879), 111. 

4 Phil. der Gr. If. 2°, 569-5701. 

¢ Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (5th edn., ed. Kranz, 
1934-1937). 

? Philologus, LIII (1894), 39-44. 

XXVili 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

Platt seems to have known nothing of Bonitz’ or 
Susemihl’s work, and Bitterauf seems to have known 
nothing of Platt’s work. Bitterauf refers to and 
quotes Susemihl’s article, but puts forward as an 
original conjecture one which Susemihl had already 
made (756 a_24). 

Several emendations have been put forward by 
various scholars, beginning with Schneider, on the 
strength of Gaza’s Latin version, others on that of 
William of Moerbeke. As a contribution to the pro- 
jected Teubner edition of G.A., Dittmeyer ¢ published 
in 1915 the first part of William’s version (up to 
737 b 5)... Although this version gives support to two 
small emendations already adopted in my present 
text (at 733 b 34 and 734 b 18), and at 775 a 11 ff. 
(teste Schneider) preserves a passage which our Greek 
mss. have lost, in general it does not yield anything 
that is independent of our existing Greek mss. and is, 
as Dittmeyer himself agreed, of little value for the 
restoration of the text.” 

The case is far different with Michael Scot’s version. 
This was made about 1217, not from a Greek text, 
but from an Arabic translation, itself made at the 
beginning of the 9th century, and hence the Greek 
text involved must have been considerably older than 
any of our present mss. and a priori may have repre- 
sented an independent tradition of the text ; indeed, 
my examination of Scot’s version has proved this to 
be so. Dittmeyer quotes Schneider’s opinion (IV. 
xxxvii) that Scot’s version is of little value for restor- 

* Guilelmi Moerbekensis translatio commentationis Aris- 
totelicae De generatione animalium. Edidit Leonardus 
Dittmeyer. Programm des K. humanistischen Gymnasiums 

Dillingen a. D. fiir das Schuljahr 1914/15. 
» See also P.A. (Loeb ed.), p. 47. 

XXix 

William of 
Moerbeke’s 
translation. 

Michael 

Scot's 
translation. 

ARISTOTLE 

ing the text, but it is obvious that neither he nor 
Bitterauf* had troubled to read Scot’s version of 
G.A. beyond the tiny fragments ( frustula, Dittmeyer’s 
own word) quoted by previous scholars. Against this 
we have the opinion of G. Rudberg,’ who had made 
a considerable study of it in connexion with H.A. and 
published its version of H.A. X in extenso, that there is 
no doubt of its critical value for rectifying the text ; 
and this judgement I can confirm from my own 
experience. Naturally, the circumstances dictate 
that proper safeguards must be adopted in using it 
for correcting the Greek text ; and what these are 
can be learnt only by fairly wide experience of the 
version itself; any judgement given,° either for or 
against, without this experience as a foundation is 
worse than useless. My own method has involved 
the transcription of a large number of continuous 
passages from the mss. of Scot’s version, containing 
places which some previous editor or I myself had 
already felt for some reason to be doubtful ; and the 
pertinent parts of these, where they have anything to 
contribute, I have given in the apparatus. Scot's 
version sometimes confirms conjectures previously 
made, sometimes it confirms the suspected corruption 
of the text either through glosses or otherwise, and 
in these cases may suggest means for remedying the 
trouble. Often it clearly confirms the existing text ; 
sometimes it gives no clear indication, and sometimes 

2 Bitterauf quotes Scot only once, and that quotation is 
taken from Bussemaker. 

» Kleinere Aristotelesfragen, in Hranos, IX (1909), 92 ff. ; 
see also Zum so-genannten 10. Buch der Tiergeschichte, Up- 
sala, 1911. 

° eg., D. W. Thompson, C.R. LIT (1938), 15 ** the dubious 
aid of an Arabic version *’; see also ibid., p. 89. 

xXXX 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

it simply omits the passage. I consider the time and 
trouble spent upon Scot’s version as well spent. 

The Greek commentary of Michael of Ephesus Comment 
(formerly attributed to Johannes Philoponus), 11— 37.0%.) of 
12th century a.p., has been edited by Michael Ephesus. 
Hayduck (Berlin, 1903), but it is of little use for 
textual criticism. 

Apart from manuscript errors of the usual kind, tterpola- 
and losses of words or phrases due to homoioteleuton, “°?® °° 
ete., which will be found noted in their places where 
they can be detected, the chief points of note in the 
text of G.A. may be classed as follows : 

A. Paragraphs, occasionally sentences only, which 
obviously interrupt the line of argument or are 
superfluous to it. Of these, some seem to be 

(a) genuine Aristotelian material, but misplaced, 
perhaps incorporated at the wrong place, or 
perhaps originally supplementary notes never 
intended to stand in the text ; 

(6) alternative versions of matter already in the 
text ; 

(c) extraneous matter, derived from commentators’ 
remarks and wrongly incorporated in the text 
(e.g... 724 b 12-23, 726 b 25-30). 

These are often found at the beginning or end of 

a section, which suggests that they were originally 

appended in the margin. There is no need to give a 

full list of these passages, but a list of (a) and (b) may 

be useful. They are: 

715 b 26-30 ; 718 a 27-34; 726 a 16-25; 732 a 12- 
23; 737 a 35-b7; 760 a 26-27 ; 760 b 2-8; 760 b 33— 
761 a2; 781 a 21-b6. 

B. Short passages, often only a few words, derived 
Xxxi 

ARISTOTLE 

from glosses which have either (a) supplanted the 
text or (b) been incorporated into it. 

There are a great many short interpolations, and 
I have frequently omitted them from the translation. 

Mopern EpITIons 

1. The Berlin edition of Aristotle, by Immanuel 
Bekker. Vol. I includes G.A., pages 715-789 
(by the columns and lines of which the work is 
normally cited). Berlin, 1831. 

la. The Oxford edition (a reprint of the preceding). 
Vol. V includes G.A. Oxford, 1837. 

2. One-volume edition of Aristotle’s works, by C. H. 
Weise.* Leipzig, 1843. 

3. The Didot edition. Edited by Bussemaker. Vol. 
III includes G.A. Paris, 1854. 

4. The Leipzig edition. Vol. III contains G.4., 
edited and translated into German by H. Aubert 
and Fr. Wimmer. Leipzig, 1860. Contains a 
useful introduction, table of animals, and Greek 
index. 

TransLatTions ON ty ? 

5. Thomas Taylor. English translation of Aristotle 
in ten volumes. Vol. IV contains G.A. (pp. 
243 ff.). London, 1808. 

6. J. Barthélemy -Saint- Hilaire. Introduction, 

* The text of this edition is the pre-Bekker vulgata, 
founded on Sylburg and Casaubon. 

» The publication of a Spanish translation of the complete 
works of Aristotle was begun in 1931, but I have been unable 
to discover whether G.A. has yet appeared in it. 

¢ Saint-Hilaire argues (I. cclix ff.) that Book V of G.A. 
does not belong with the rest of the treatise, but goes rather 
XXxii 

~ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

French translation of G!A. and notes. In two 
volumes. Paris, 1887. 

7. Arthur Platt. Inthe Oxford series of translations 
of Aristotle. Vol. V contains Platt’s translation 
of G.A., with notes. Oxford, 1910. 

Tue TRANSLATION 

In translating G.A. I have followed two main principles 
principles, with the aim of presenting Aristotle as of f=" 
faithfully as possible to the English reader : 

(1) Ihave attempted to translate G.A. into English, 
and therefore I have not felt obliged to write in 
Aristotelian, or even in Greek, idiom. Hence, for ex- 
ample, I have not uniformly translated yap by “ for,” 
kai by “and,” or 6€ by “but”: unfortunately, 
it is still necessary to point out, even to learned 
reviewers, that there is a better way than that of 
*“ stock ” translations ; and a translator is not auto- 
matically a traitor if he sometimes omits yap—as the 
most idiomatic way of translating it. 

(2) Technical terms, on the other hand, must 
whenever possible be uniformly represented by an 
invariable term in the English. Sometimes this rule 
must be broken, either (a) because the original term 
has a variety of meanings (e.g., divayus), sometimes 
(6) because there is no English word which will do 
(e.g., cvvictdvar). I have avoided modernizing Aris- 
totle’s terms, so as to avoid misleading any modern 

with P.A. The same suggestion, unknown to him, had been 
made by Weise (p. xxix) in 1843. Saint-Hilaire thinks that 
its inclusion with G.A. dates from the time of Andronicus of 
Rhodes, head of the Peripatetic School at Rome, who edited 
Aristotle’s works from the mss. belonging to Apellicon’s 
library brought to Rome by Sulla in 84 B.c. 

—— 

of annota- 
tion ; 

ARISTOTLE 

readers who may have but little Greek ; and on the 
positive side I have given a full account of many of 
these terms in the Introduction. In my opinion, it 
is essential that the Introduction be read before 
undertaking any study of the treatise itself. 

The purpose I have had in mind, therefore, is to 
ensure so far as possible, that the reader shall not 
have the unnecessary difficulty of “ translators’ 
English ” to overcome, but shall be able to give his 
full attention to Aristotle’s thought and argument : 
this is especially necessary in the present case, where 
we are dealing primarily with a scientific treatise. 
My aim has not been to paraphrase Aristotle or to 
‘“‘ improve ” upon him, but to represent what he says 
as closely and as faithfully as possible in English. 

Since, however, G.A. is not intelligible, even to a 
Greek scholar, without some familiarity with Aris- 
totle’s general thought and some of his main doctrines, 
I have provided an outline of these in the Introduction 
and in the Appendix ; and in the footnotes I have 
given many cross-references to other passages in G.A. 
and other treatises ; attention is also called to points 
of special interest. One of these, which I think has 
not hitherto been noticed, may be mentioned here : 
the possibility that there is an allusion at 735 b 17 to 
an early process of oil-flotation in ore-dressing. 

The Index is not intended to be exhaustive, but 
forms a supplement to the Contents-Summary 
(p. lxxi) and the Introduction. Particular attention 
is given to certain key-phrases and ideas. It covers 
the Preface, Introduction, footnotes and Appendix 
as well as the translation. ; 

A glance through the Index may help a reader 
with special interests to find the passages most 

XXXiV 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

releyant to his subject: e.g., the entry “ causation, 
mechanical ” gives a reference to the passage, speci- 
ally interesting to modern readers, which compares 
the development of the embryo to the action of 
automatic puppets. 

A number of books which the student of Aristotle’s additional 
zoological works will find useful are mentioned in the DiQUO 
footnotes throughout the volume; to them may be 
added the following : 

F. J. Cole, Early Theories of Sexual Generation, 
Oxford, 1930. 

C. H. Haskins, Studies in the History of Medieval 
Science, ed. 2, Cambridge, Mass., 1927. 

T. E. Lones, Aristotle’s Researches in Natural Science, 
London, 1912. 

A. W. Meyer, The Rise of Embryology, Stanford, 

, Calif., 1939. 

C. Singer, Studies in the History and Method of Science, 
Oxford, 1921. 

C. Singer, Greek Biology and Greek Medicine, Oxford, 
1922. 

H. B. Torrey and F. Felin, Was Aristotle an Evolu- 

- ttonist? in Qu. Rev. of Biology (Baltimore), XII 

(1937), 1-18. : 

D’Arcy W. Thompson, Essay on “‘ Natural Science ” 
in The Legacy of Greece, Oxford, 1924. 

S. D. Wingate, The Medieval Latin Versions of the 
Aristotelian Scientific Corpus, London, 1931.* 

In addition to Ross’s Aristotle and Jaeger’s Aristotle 
(English translation by R. Robinson) and Diokles von 
Karystos, which are of special importance, the fol- 

* For other works on the early translations, see my edition 
of P.A. (Loeb Library). 

XXXV 

ARISTOTLE 

lowing bear upon certain subjects dealt with in 

Gils: 

P. Bochert, Aristoteles’ Erdkunde von Asien und takyen) 
1908, and 

H. Diller, Wanderarst und Aitiologe,. 1934 (for the 
effects of climate, etc.). 

H. Meyer, Das Vererbungsproblem bei Aristoteles, in 
Philologus, LXXV (1919), 323 ff. 

M. Wellmann, Fragmentsammlung der sikelischen 
Arste, 1901. 

The following more general technical works may 
also be mentioned : 

J. S. Huxley and G. R. de Beer, The Elements of 
Experimental Embryology, Cambridge, 1934. 

H. G. Miiller-Hess, Die Lehre von der Menstruation 
vom Beginn der Neuzeit bis sur Begriindung der 
Zellenlehre, Abhandl. z. Gesch. d. Naturm. u. 
Med., 1938, no. 27. 

Aute Richards, Outline of Comparative Embryology, 
New York, 1931. 

D’Arcy W. Thompson, Growth and Form, Cambridge, 
1917 (new ed., 1942). 

P. Weiss, Principles of Development, New York, 1939. 

The standard work on its subject is Geschlecht und 

Geschlechter im Tierreiche, by Johannes Meisenheimer 

(1921). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

It is a great pleasure to acknowledge here the help 
which I have received from many friends in many 
ways, and above all to thank them for their continuous 
interest and encouragement. First I thank Dr. 
W.H.D. Rouse, my old teacher and present colleague, 

XXXVi 

72 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

to whom I owe, among many other things, the oppor- 
tunity of undertaking this translation. The whole of 
the translation has been read through by my col- 
leagues Mr. H. Rackham and Dr. F. H. A. Marshall, 
F.R.S., and also by Dr. Sydney Smith ; for valuable 
help with some difficult passages in the Greek I am 
indebted to Professor R. Hackforth, and to Mr. Hugh 
Tredennick, who has also read part of the translation ; 
for much assistance in biological matters I am in- 
debted to Dr. Marshall, to Dr.. Joseph Needham, 
F.R.S., to Dr. Smith, and to Miss M. E. Brown. 
Professor A. S. Pease of Harvard University has 
placed me under a great obligation by most courte- 
ously securing for me microfilms of Bitterauf’s two 
pamphlets and of Dittmeyer’s edition of Moerbeke’s 
translation, none of which I could find in this 
country. It is a special pleasure to acknowledge 
this help from America. I am indebted to the 
staff of Cambridge University Library for excellent 
arrangements made for me to read the microfilms 
and also the Scot manuscripts. Dr. P. J. Durrant 
suggested to me that the mention of oil in connexion 
with lead-ore (see Bk. II. 735 b 17) might indicate 
an early process of flotation. Finally but not least 
I should like to express my appreciation of the kind- 
ness of Mr. R. Elmhirst, Director of the Marine 
Biological Station at Millport, Great Cumbrae, who 
gave me a room in which to work at my translation 
during a visit to Millport in the summer of 1938 and 
also included me in an expedition to Loch Goil for 
collecting marine animals closely allied to those often 
mentioned by Aristotle. 

ont hee 
Easter Eve, 1942 

XXXVii 

INTRODUCTION 
The “‘ Causes” 

The four (1) Aristotle begins and ends the G.A. with a or 

Causes. 

about Causes 7; and indeed Causes are at the founda- 

tion of all his thought, especially of his theories about 

animal reproduction and development. 
To know, says Aristotle, is to know by means of 

Causes (see Anal. Post. 94 a 20). A thing is explained 

when you know its Causes.. And a Cause is that which 

is responsible, in any of four modes, for a thing’s exist- 
ence. The four Causes are: ' 

(1) The Final Cause, the End or Object towards which 
a formative process advances, and for the sake of 
which it advances—the logos,” the rational purpose. 

* (2) The Motive (or Efficient) Cause, the agent which is 
responsible for having set the process going; it is _ 
that by which the thing is made. 

(3) The Formal Cause, or Form, which is responsible - 
for the character of the course which the process 
follows (this also is described as the logos,” as express- 
ing what the thing is, or is to be). 

(4) The Material Cause, or Matter, out of which the 
thing is made. 

(2) As an illustration of the theory of Causes the following 
will serve. Suppose the thing to be explained is a dog. 
The chronological order of the Causes is different from 
their logical order. 

(1) The Motive Cause: the male parent which supplied ~ 
the ** movement” that set the process of develop- 
ment going. 

(2) The Material Cause: the menstrual fluid and the 
nourishment supplied by the female parent and 
other nourishment taken after birth. 

(3) The Formal Cause. The embryo and the puppy 
as it grew into a dog followed a process of de- 
velopment which had the special character proper 
to dogs. 

« In the translation I have retained the traditional rendering “‘ cause ’’ 
for airia, although perhaps in some contexts “‘ reason ’”’ or “ explana- 
tion ’’ might have been a closer rendering; but a variation in the 
English term might well produce more obscurity than clarity. 

» See § 10 below. 

XXXViii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

(4) The Final Cause : the end towards which the process 
was directed, the perfect and full-grown dog. 
A fagdlar set of examples could be constructed to suit 

_ the case of artificial objects, though some adjustments 
would have to be made. In both ‘cases the Formal 
Cause comes from the same source as the Motive Cause, 
but with a difference : in the case of natural objects, the 
t already possesses the Form fully realized in 
himself : in the case of artificial objects, the craftsman 
possesses the Form “ in his Soul.” Both the parent and 
the craftsman normally employ “* instruments ”’ to deal 

_ with the “ material’; these are not mentioned in the 
_— given above, but will be dealt with in Appendix 
§$ 9 ff. 
(3) Very often the Final and Motive Causes tend naturally 
to coalesce with the Formal Cause, in opposition to the 
Material Cause; and this opposition is found in G.A. 
(e.g., Book II, init.), where Aristotle regards the male 
(which possesses the Form and which supplies the 
** movement ”’ and therefore acts as a Motive Cause) as 
— and more “‘ divine” than the female (which 
pplies the raw material for the embryo, i.¢., supplies 
the Material Cause). At the same time, we shall find 
(below, §§ 6, 7) that the Motive and Material Causes are 
often together contrasted with the Final Cause, just as 
Necessity is contrasted with the Good. 

(4) In modern parlance the term Cause has become gener- 
ally limited to Motive (Efficient) Causes, as is shown by 
the common phrase “ cause and effect *’; and hence 
when Aristotle is concerned especially with the opera- 
tion of Motive Causes (as ¢.g. at 734 b 9 ff.) his words 
have a more modern and familiar ring than when he is 

Hor Ar king of Final Causes. 
(5) Aristotle himself, however, it is the Final Cause, the “ Teleo- 
nd, which is of paramount importance and which logy.’ 
Roane every process. This is abundantly clear in 
the P.A., where Aristotle endeavours throughout to 
provide a Final Cause which will explain the existence 
and structure of the various parts; and it is no less 
clear in the G.A., where the whole process of develop- 
ment of the embryo from start to finish is subservient 
to the Final Cause: the course of the process is deter- 

% 

XXxXixX 

** Internal 
finality ”: 
but modified 
in various 
ways: 

(a) perpetu- 
ation of 
species ; 

(o) human 
societies ; 

xl 

ARISTOTLE ; 

mined by the nature of the product which is to result 
from it, not the other way round: things yiyvera as 
they do because they are what they are.* We are 
therefore justified in describing Aristotle’s outlook as 
“ teleological * ; but we must not read too much into 
this description. ‘‘ Nature does nothing without a 
purpose”; but if we ask what that purpose is, we may 
find that the answer is not quite what we had ex E 
that the purpose is not so grand as we had hoped. 
Aristotle seems to be satisfied when the réAos has been 
realized in each individual’s full development ; and this 
is because for him Form is not normally independent of 

, Matter (as it is for Plato); Form must be embodied in 

matter, that is, in individuals. Each complete and 
perfect embodiment and realization of Form in Matter 
is therefore for him the crowning achievement of the 
efforts of the four Causes—it is the End towards which 
they were directed. We might, then, describe this 
“teleology ’ in Bergson’s phrase as a doctrine of 
“internal finality ’’: each individual is ‘* complete ” 
in itself.’ Aristotle does, however, maintain that the 
“most natural” thing for an animal to do is to pro- 
duce another one like itself, and hence the species is 
implicated in so far as it is the individual’s business 
to perpetuate it (see App. A §§ 15 ff.). We must 
also remember that the continuity of yéveois, one de- 
partment of which is the continuous succession of 
generations of animals, is, for Aristotle, ‘* necessary ” 
(App. A § 14); and it is also part of the general 
purpose of “‘ God,’’ who always aims at ‘‘ the better,” 
and who, because he was unable to fill the whole 
universe from circumference to centre with eternal 
“ being,” filled up the central region of it with the 
next best available, viz., continuous yéveois.° In another 
connexion, too, in the Ethics, we find that Aristotle 
looks further than the individual, at any rate so far as 
man is concerned, for there he tells us that man 
cannot attain his réAos in the fullest sense—the ** good 
life *’—except in association (76 ov¢#v) with other men 

« Of. quotation from hore aveneee xx. 78, on p. 1. 
e For further details see App. A § 12, 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

in a wéXs. But this seems to be due exclusively to 
the fact that man possesses Reason; and so far as 
other animals are concerned, Aristotle does not appear 
to have envisaged any such widening of the 7édos.* 
From yet another point of view, however, when discuss- (c) sub- 
ing the subject of property and household management ordination 
at the beginning of the Politics (1256 b 15), Aristotle Pf animals 
says that just as Nature provides sustenance for animals ar 
from the very beginning of their existence in the larva, 
in the egg, or in the uterus, so we must hold that after 
birth as well Nature provides plants for the sake of 
animals, and also that she provides animals other than 
man for the sake 4 men, for food and service: And if 
we are right in holding that Nature makes nothing 
without a purpose (dreAés) or pointlessly, we must of 
necessity say that ‘‘ Nature has made all the animals 
for the sake of men.” 

(6) As Aristotle says at the beginning of G.A. I, the two Grouping of 
Causes with which he is chiefly concerned in this treatise the Causes. 

are (1) the Motive (or Efficient) Cause, with which he 

had not dealt in P.A., and (2) the Material Cause. In 
zoology, of course, the Material Cause is represented by 
the “ parts ’ of the body of an animal, and all of these 
except the generative “* parts’ ® he had dealt with in 
P.A.; hence in G.A. the Material Cause is represented 
chiefly by the parts concerned in generation—those, in 
fact, through which and upon which the Motive Cause 
operates. At the beginning of Books II and V and at 
the end of Book V we have further discussions about 
Causes, and here we find these two Causes identified 
with “ that which is of necessity ”’ (éé avdyxns) ; while Necessity 
on the other side and contrasted with them is the Final versus the 
Cause (the Cause “‘ for the sake of which *’), which is Better- 
equated with ro tov or tayabov (cf. Met. A 
983 a 33, etc.). Indeed, this contrast of Necessity and 
the Better is continually confronting us throughout the 
G.A. For instance (717 a 15 ff.), whatever Nature does 
or makes is done or made either 8a 76 dvayxaiov or dia 
76 BéArvov ; one or other of these will account for every 

« Perhaps Aristotle would have been willing to include Bees, which 

possess some “ divine ’’ ingredient (see 761 a 5). 

® It should be remembered that “ parts ”’ includes semen, milk, etc. 
See §§ 18 ff. 
xli 

Necessity : 

(i) ‘*con- 
ditional *’ ; 

(ii) ‘‘ ab- 
solute,” 

ARISTOTLE 

phenomenon in the realm of Nature. The whole of 
Book V is devoted to those features—* conditions ” 
(2d@) as Aristotle calls them—in animals which are in 
no way due to a Final Cause but are due purely to 
Necessity, 7.e., to Material and Motive Causes, . 

(7) We must, however, distinguish two sorts of Necessity 
(the second of which will be the one just described) : 

(1) 

(2) 

The first isthat which elsewhere (¢.9., P..A. 642 a7 ff., 
a 32 ff.; cf. 639 b 25 ff, Phys. 199 b 33 ff.) 
Aristotle describes as ‘‘ conditional” (€ taofécews) 
Necessity ; that is to say, assuming that some end 
or purpose is to be achieved, certain means are 
necessary in order to achieve it. In other words, 
this is the sort of Necessity which is implied by the 
Final Cause being what it is. Thus, if a piece of 
wood is to be split, an axe or some such instrument 
is necessary, and the axe must, owing to the nature 
of the circumstances, be hard and sharp, hence of 
necessity bronze or iron must be used to make it. 
The same sort of Necessity is obviously involved in 
the construction by Nature of the living body and 
its various parts : certain materials must of necessity 
be used and certain processes gone through if this 
or that living body is to be produced. 

The other sort of Necessity is that which Aristotle 
(Phys. 199 b 33 et al.) calls ** simple ” or “* absolute ”’ 
Necessity (a7A@s). This applies in cases (a) where 
the presence of a material object or set of objects 
(i.e, a Material Cause), and the fact that their 
nature is what it is, entails as a necessary con- 
sequence a certain result or set of results ; (b) where 
the nature of the ‘‘ movement ” set up by an activat- 
ing agent (a Motive Cause) similarly entails certain 
results. This ‘‘ simple’ or ‘‘ absolute’. Necessity 
may therefore be regarded as the sort of Necessity 
involved in the Material and Motive Causes—as a 
reassertion of themselves by these Causes against 
the Final Cause (GA. 778 b 1) and against Nature 
as she advances towards her achievement of it. 
‘In the field of natural objects, Necessity is what 

«, Thus even this Necessity can be said to be located “‘ in the matter ”’ 
(Phys. 200 a 15). © 

xlii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 
we call matter and the xwiyces of matter’ (Phys. 
202 a -32).% 
(8) Aristotle, however, is continually drawing our attention used by 
to the adroitness of Nature in employing the results of Nature to 
_ this latter sort of Necessity in order to serve her purpose, pocktohed ; 
H in order to achieve her end. For example (738 a 33 ff.), 
f the production of ‘* residue ” by females is €€ dvayxns, 
$ simply because the female is not hot enough to effect 
A complete concoction; but Nature makes use of this 
eaithie to provide the material out of which the embryo 
-is to be formed. Other instances of things which, 
though occurring ¢é dvdéyxns, are nevertheless employed 
‘by Nature &exd twos, will be found at, ¢.g., 739 b 28, 
743 a 36 ff., 755 a 22, 776 a 15 ff.,b 33. See also P.A. 
642 a 31, 663 b 13, b 20 ff. On the other hand, Nature 
cannot always manage to do this, and what results then 
is a useless residue (¢.g., excrements), or a “ colliques- 
cence’ (P.A. 677 a 12 ff.).. These by-products, how- 
ever, may still be regarded as “* natural,” ® because they 
are of general occurrence (that is one definition of what 
is‘ natural’’; see GA. 727 b 29, 770 b 10 ff., 777 a 20 ff., 
P.A. 663 b 28). When, however, Nature is more 
seriously thwarted by the indeterminateness or the 
unevenness of matter (G.A. 778 a7; ef. App. A § 11), 
we find unnatural results occurring, such as monstrosi- 
ties and deformities (see G.A. IV. 766 a 18 ef passim).° 
(9) The “ simple” or “ absolute” Necessity described in (iii) “ab- 
the preceding paragraphs refers only to the limited field ao ee 
of some particular yuyvopevor, i.e., to the process by repay a fer 
means of which some particular natural object is pro- as a whole. 
duced and to the Causes therein concerned. But there 
is a wider and more universal meaning of “ simple ” or 
“absolute * Necessity (which we may, if we like, 
consider as being an extension by Aristotle of the 
narrower meaning of Necessity as applied to the yéveais 
of individual things, though it is really on a different 

@ The verb ovpBaivecy (sometimes in the phrase cupBaiver é& avayKys) 
is frequently used with reference to the results of this sort of Necessity, 
as being facts which merely “ occur ”’ and are not designed to forward 
any purpose. - 
® A “ colliquescence *” may be an unnatural by-product; see G.A. 
724 b 26-29 and § 67 below. 

¢ For further notes on “ Nature,”’ see §§ 12 ff. 

xiii 

ae 

(10) 

ARISTOTLE 

plane)—a Necessity which embraces the whole field of 
yeveots in the universe at large, i.¢., the whole process 
of the seasonal and cyclic transformations of the “‘ ele- 
ments,” and the whole process of the cyclical generation 
ef animals and plants (see App. A §§ 12 ff.) ; and which 
even further still (ibid. ; and see P.A. 639 b 24) includes 
those things which do not pass through a process of 
formation (yéveors) at all, but persist eternal and immut- 
able. In this context Aristotle lays down an & C. 
337 b 35) that e€ dvdyxns and dei coincide; thus 
‘* eternity ’’—whether it be individual eternity, as of the 
stars, or specific eternity, as of plants and animals—and 
Necessity are mutually interconnected (see App. A § 14) ; 
thus, that which always is or always yiyvera, is, or 
ylyvera, of necessity; that which is, or yiyvera, of 
necessity, is, or ytyvera, always. This meaning o 
* absolute ’’ Necessity, however, does not enter directly 
into the G.A., though it is once touched upon in ing 
(at 770 b 12; ef. 742 b 26 ff.), and it is incidentally 
implied to some extent in the passages of Books II and 
vod NOB oe to and supplemented in the Appendix, A 
an a 

Aéyos 

Frequently in the translation, rather than represent 
Adyos by an inadequate or misleading word, I have 
transliterated it by logos.” This serves the useful pur- 
pose of reminding the reader that we have here a term 
of wide and varied application, with which a number of 
correlated conceptions are associated, one or other of 
which may be uppermost in a particular case. The 
fundamental idea of Adyos, as its connexion with Aéyew 
shows, is that of something spoken or uttered, more 
especially a rational utterance or rational explanation, 
expressing a thing’s nature and the plan of it; hence 
Adyos can denote the defining formula, the definition of 
a thing’s essence, of its essential being (as often in the 
phrase Adyos ris odoias), expressing the structure or 
character of the object to be defined. See also § 1 above. 

a Other modes of Necessity not relevant to G.A. are here omitted. 
+ The less technical meanings are translated in the normal way. 

xliv 

Sern 

a 

RRR ENS 

- GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

| Apxy ~ 
(11) For want of a better term, and in order to preserve the 
- line of Aristotle’s thought, I have usually translated dpyj 
by “ principle,’ or “ first principle.’ There is, -how- 
ever, really but little difficulty about this term, for the 
context will usually indicate what its connotation is. A 
few examples of its use may be given. (1) Often, as at 
715 a 6, it is a principle or source of “* movement ” (dpy7) 
THs Kwhoews). Hence, obviously, (2) the Motive Cause 
may be described as an dpyy, and so too may the other 
Causes (¢.g., 716 a 5 ff., 778 a 7), including Matter; 
and for the same reasons the sexes also are dpyai; so 
is semen. (3) An dpyy is something which though 
small in itself is of great importance and influence as 
being the source or starting-point upon which other 
things depend, and which causes great changes (xujcecs) 
in them (cf. 716 b 3, 763 b 23 ff, 766 a 14 #f.). An 
apxy may, of course, be of greater or. less fundamental 
importance; and the ultimate dpy7 of an animal is its 
heart (¢.g., 766 a 35), though there are also dpyaé that 
are external to the animal, ¢.g., the sun and moon 
(777 b 24). 

Pics, Tipwpa 

(12) IIjpwpa, dvamynpia, and cognate words occur several “ Deforma- 
times in G.A., and for convenience I have translated tion.” 
them “ deformation ” or “‘ deformity.” Other possible 
renderings, none of which fully brings out the meaning 
of the Greek word, are given in the note on 737 a 25. 

The underlying notion is that ¢dvas has not succeeded in 
achieving her proper zéAos ; and this close connexion of 

mipwpa with a falling short of natural completeness is 

clearly brought out by the reasons given at 724 b 33 

why semen cannot be a m7jpwya, viz., because it is found 

in all individuals (for that which is “ general” is 

“ natural,” see § 8), and because 7 dvais yiyvera: out 

of semen, 

(13) Perhaps the most striking instance of Aristotle’s applica- The female 
» tion of this idea is his statement (775 a 15) that female- 4 “de- 

ness (@nAvrns) is “ as it were a natural dvamnpia.” Here rmity- 
we have two conceptions of Nature asserting themselves 

xlv 

Nature 
versus 
Nature. 

Nature: 
as purpose ; 

comparable 
to an 

artist. 

Nature as 
Soul, 

ARISTOTLE 

in Aristotle’s mind + (1) that the male represents the full 
development of which Nature is jaime it is hotter 
than the femdle, and more “ able” té effect concoction, 
etc. ; but at the same time (2) the female is so universal 
and regular an occurrence that it cannot be dismissed 
out of hand as “ unnatural’’; besides, the female is 
essential for generation, which is a typically ‘“‘ natural ”’ 
process (see § 5). : 

(14) This opposition of “* Nature ” to “* Nature ” is, however, 
not unique, for it is found elsewhere in Aristotle; ¢.g., 
at G.A. 770 b 20 he can say that 7d wapa ddow is in a 
way xara dvow, viz., when 7 Kara 70 eldos dias has not 
mastered 7 Kara tiv vAnv divas; and at P.A. 663 b 22 
he speaks of 7 xara tov Aoyor dvors making use of the 
products of 4 avayxaia dvois in order to serve a purpose 
(cf. also P.A. 641 a 26, 642 a 17; at Phys. 199 a 31 
Aristotle distinguishes dvats &s tA and dvars as popd7}, 
the latter being a réAos and 7 airia 7 od Evexa. Cf. 
729 a 34, n.). ‘ 

(15) It is impossible and unnecessary to provide here a full 
account of what Aristotle intended by the term dvats, 
since a proper understanding of it can best be obtained 
by rallies Aristotle’s works themselves, and for this 
G.A, is one of the most useful, because it is pervaded 
by references to dvais. A few remarks may however 
be made here about dva:s in its highest manifestation. 

(16) By Aristotle, dvovs and the products of dvois are con- 
stantly compared with réyvn and the products of réyvy: 
dvois works to produce a finished product, a 7éAos, a 
as the artist or craftsman does“; and vos, again like 
the artist, uses “ instruments,” charged with a specific 
‘** movement,” in order to bring these products to fulfil-- 
ment. And the most typical of the products of dvows 
are, of course, living creatures; indeed, Aristotle can 
speak of the dvats of. each living thing as being identical 
with nutritive Soul (741 a 1, where see note, and eéf. 
P.A. 641 b 9), the Soul which generates and fashions it 
and promotes its growth ; and again (De caelo 301 b 17), 
dvats is to be regarded as a principle of movement in the 

« dacs is also compared (744 b 16) to a careful housekeeper, who 
throws away nothing that is useful; or to a cook (743 a 31; of 

767 a 17 ff.), tempering the heat of her stove so that the food she is 

preparing may be done toa turn, See also Supperpia, § 39. 

xvi 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

thing itself. An artist, then, at work—yes, but in each 
several thing ; and it is doubtful whether Aristotle had, 
or intended to have, any idea of Nature over and above, 

_ outside, the individual things * which he described as 
her “ works.’ In fact, he goes so far as to say (P.A. 
641 » 11) that no abstraction can be the object of study 
for Natural science, because Nature makes all that she 
makes to serve some purpose (évexd tov). Nature aims 
always at producing a réAos in the sense of a completely 
formed individual, and that is the Final Cause in each 
case, for that is what has the best claim to be called a 
“ being” (odeia).” There is, says Aristotle, more beauty 

(to 08 €vexa «ai 76 KaAdv) to be found in the 
works of Nature than in those of art (P.A. 639 b 20). 

(17) Nevertheless, we must remember that Nature is not, in Nature as 
Aristotle’s view, a term to be exclusively reserved for the matter. 
Final Cause, with which are associated the Formal and 
often the Motive Causes; it may be applied also, as we 
saw just now (§ 14), to the Material Cause; and in this 
connexion we may recall that, for Aristotle, Matter and 

_ Form themselves pervade all the strata of existence, for 
even the simplest sort of Matter is to some extent * in- 

_ formed,” and Matter in its highest phase is identical” 
with Form (see 729 a 34, n.). 

i Mépuov, pépos, “ part” : 

(18) The term “ part,” which occurs in the title of the treatise Meaning. 

De partibus animalium, epi Céwv popiaw (or, as Aristotle 
himself calls it at G.A. 782 a 21, “ the treatise Of the 
Causes of the Parts of Animals ”’), includes considerably 
more than is normally included by the English “ part of 
the body.” For instance, we should not normally call 
blood a “ part,” but Aristotle applies the term pdpcov to 
all the constituent substances of the body as well as to the 
limbs and organs. For him, blood is one of the Céwv 
popa (see P.A. 648 a 2; and note on GA. 720 b 31). 
Since, however, all the “ parts ” are either “ uniform ” 
or “non-uniform,” a detailed description of them will 
be more appropriate in the following paragraphs. 

@ See however § 5 above. 
® See App. A § 18. 

c xlvii 

Two sorts 
of ‘ parts.” 

Relation 
between 
them. 

(19) 

(20) 

(21) 

ARISTOTLE o 

Ta opovopepy popio, the “uniform parts” 
Ta dvopovopepy popra, the “non-uniform parts” 

At G.A, 724 b 23 ff., Aristotle classifies the substances 
found in the body into five divisions, one of which is 
‘“natural parts,’’ * and this division he subdivides into 
“uniform parts’ and “non-uniform parts.” As 
examples of “* uniform parts ” he cites (P.A. 647 b 10 ff.) 
blood, serum, lard, suet, marrow, semen, bile, milk, 
flesh » (these are soft and “ fluid ’’ © ones); also bone, 
fish-spine, sinew, blood-vessel (these are hard and 
‘*‘ solid”? ones). And although in some cases the same 
name is applied to the substance out of which the whole 
is made and to the whole that is made out of it,® this is 
not true in all cases. Examples of “ non-uniform ” 
arts are (P.A. 640 b 20) face, hand, foot. 
he relation of the “ uniform ” to the “ non-uniform ” 
parts Aristotle describes as follows (P.A. 647 b 22 ff.): 
(a) some of the uniform parts are the material out of 
which the non-uniform are made (i.¢., each instru- 
mental part is made out of bones, sinews, flesh, etc.) ; 
(b) some, viz., “‘ fluid’ ones, serve as nourishment for 
those in class (a), since all growth is derived from 
fluid matter ; 
(c) some are ‘ residues ’’ ¢ from those in class (6), e.9., 
faeces, urine. 
Thus it is not possible to equate this division into uni- 
form and non-uniform parts with the more modern 
division into tissues and organs; for instance, blood, 
though a uniform part, is not a tissue. The term 
‘* organs,’’ on the other hand, corresponds closely with 
Aristotle’s own description of the non-uniform parts 
(P.A. 647 b 23) as 7a dpyarxa wépy; ‘* the instrumental 
arts,” 
The fundamental difference between the two sorts of 
‘*‘ parts ’’ is that each of the uniform parts has its own 
definite character as a substance (in the modern sense), 

a This must not be taken to imply the existence of unnatural “* parts.”’ 

» Some of these are also ‘‘ residues ’’ ; see below, § 65 

e For the meaning of “‘ fluid ’’ and “ solid,”’ see below, § 38. 

d ¢.g., we speak of “ bone ”’ and ‘‘a bone ’’; Aristotle’s own example 
is ** blood-vessel.”’ 

¢ See § 65. 

xviii 

~ GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

while each of the non-uniform parts has its own definite 
character as a conformation or organ. The heart is the 
only “ part”? which belongs to both classes (P.A. 
647 a 25 ff.): it is made out of one uniform part only, 
_ but at the same time it has essentially a definite con- 
ion or shape, and thus it is a non-uniform part. 
(22) The four stages or “* degrees of composition,” so far as The stages 
_ biology is concerned, are thus enumerated by Aristotle of com- 
(G.A. 715 a 10 ff. ; cf. PuA. 646 a 13 ff.) : poms. 
(1) The four “ Elements,” Fire, Air, Water, Earth ¢ ; 
3 the uniform parts ; 
3) the non-uniform parts ; 
_ (4) the animal organism as a whole. 
We thus begin from the simplest sorts of matter (Aris- 
totle calls the four Elements ‘‘ simple bodies *’) and 
proceed upwards by stages until the most organized or 
most “ informed ”’ sort of matter is reached : each stage 
is the “ material ’’ for the stage next above it (G.A. 
715 a9 ff). 7 

Avvapis 

(23) This term has a number of different, though related, 
‘meanings, and it is not always easy to determine pre- 
cisely which one Aristotle has uppermost in mind. 

5 8 nlike some other terms, therefore, this one cannot 
always be represented by the same term in English, and 
sometimes it is best left untranslated. 

(24) (A) To begin with, we will examine the pre-Aristotelian Dynameis 
meaning of dvvaycs, as found for instance in the Hippo- 45 ae 
cratic corpus and in Plato’s Timaeus. Advvayus was the po eerie 
old technical term for the simplest sorts of matter, i.¢., : 
for what came later to be called crotyeia (“‘ elements ”’). 

Avvayzs was however applied exclusively to substances 
of a particular class, viz., 76 dypév, 76 Enpdv, 76 Beppdv, To 
puxpoy, TO mKpov, TO yAvKU, TO Spyuv, etc., ete. In the 

ippocratic treatise wepi dpyains inrpixfs (The Ancient 
and Genuine Art of Medicine) these substances are 
regarded as being the constituents both of the body and 

@ Tn the P.A. passage Aristotle says it might be better to substitute 
for these “‘ the évvdyers,”’ or rather four of them ; see below, § 24. Fire, 
Air, Water, Earth are of course the constituents of non-living things as 
well; see App. A § 2. 

RG TA EES A aE 

xlix 

Earth, Air, 
Water, Fire, 
resolvable 
into 
dynameis. 

Origin of 
this usage. 

ARISTOTEE) {A420 ~ 

of its foods. The duvdayets are referred to by Aristotle at 
ef beginning of P.d. II (see § 22, note), where he speaks 
“* the ‘ elements * as they are called, viz... Earth, Air, 

fice 
Water, and Fire were “* Freer es 24.85, that res Pair 

the simplest states of matter actually found in the world 
as we know it, yet theoretically hah of them could be 
resolved into a pair of duvdpes: thus Fire is ¢ and 
énpov, Air Oeppov and dypov, Water v and typov, 
Earth ypuypdry and énpov (G. & C. $30 a 90 ff), each of 
them being characterized by one constituent par excel- 
lence, ein by Oepudv, Air by dypév, Water by pvxpor, 
Earth by énpov. Accord ing to Aristotle, all other 
physical “ differences ” are consequent erg these four 
fundamental ones. 

(25) The meaning implied in this use of Sdvapus naeenihe have 
been “ substance of a specific character ’ (perhaps the 
adjective ‘‘ strong ” should be prefixed: this would of 
course be very poe to Suvdyers such as 76 Spyst, 
76 mxpdv, etc.). But originally, no doubt, the term 
was an item in the Pythagorean political metaphor 
terminology, as would appear for instance from the 
theory held by Alemeon ¢ that bodily health was main- 
tained by the icovopia ray Suvdpewr, and that the 
“monarchy ” of any one of them produced disease. It 
is important to notice that there is no notion here of the 
substance having power in the sense of power to produce 
a specific effect» upona body, though this was ‘a meaning 

« See Aétius v. 30. 1 (Diels, Dexoarsaes, Graeci 44 442). 

> e.g., causing stomach-ache. In P s Timaeus we find this ex- 
tended meaning of dvvayis (i.e., power e sgh Soe a conte: effect) side 
by side with the old meaning of specific substance ; and it is frequent* 
in x. é:aizms. Clearly, this marks a change over from the medical 
theory originally associated with the political me taphor terminology 

and we find that, as é¥vapis takes on the meaning of power to produce 

a specific effect, ” the term “* humour ” comes in to denote the s 

substances to. which Svvapis Was OFi lly applied, Thus = 

(apud Galen vi. 455) can argue against doctors win hold that er things 

which possess similar ‘* humours’’ also possess the same évva. rae 

of producing specific effects on the body), ¢.g., are laxative, 

There is no space to say more here on this development, Which I acti 
with fully in my ace, Pseudo-Hippocrates Philosophus (1928). Studies 

lv 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

_ which developed later. A dvvajus is rather a substance 

_. which is a power, which can assert itself, and by the 
simple act of asserting itself, by being too strong, 
stro than the others, can cause trouble. The 
remedy in such a case is to deprive it of some of its 
strength, until it again takes its proper place among its 
peers, or, in the language of medicine, to ‘‘ concoct ”’ it 
or otherwise bring it into a harmless condition by 
“ blending ” * it with the other substances. 

(26) (B) As each of the substances known as duvdpers had its Dynameis as 
own specific and peculiar character, sharply marked off substances 
from the others, it was easy for the meaning “ peculiar eee: 
and distinctive character * to become closely associated acter, 
with the term dvvayis, quite apart from any reference to 
these particular substances. In fact, it almost comes 
to mean any “ substance of a distinctive quality ”; and 
in this sense it is found in G.A., for instance at 720 b 32 
(@\An tis S¥vayss) and 736 a 21 (Aphrodite was called 
after “ this dvvayis,” sc. ddpds, foam). From this it is 
an easy step to “ distinctive physical quality,” or simply 
“* distinctive character "’ (as, ¢.g., at 731 b 19, where it is 
joined with Adyos 77s odcias ; at 751 a 33, where it refers 
to the distinctive character of the yolk and white of an- 
egg respectively °; and cf. 733 b 15 €yea dStvayw dod— 
it has the distinctive character of an egg, it is equivalent 
to anegg; and 780 b 8, 784 b 15); or“ characteristic ” 

(applied to the sexes at 756 a 1, 763 b 23; cf. 760-a 19). 

(27) In the sense of “* (substance of) distinctive character ”’ it 
can be used practically as an alternative to ddois, or in 
conjunction with duos (as indeed it often is in Hippo- 
erates and Plato), and this seems to be the use of it in 
P.A. 655 b 12 -€€ dvdyxns 3€ tadra mavra yewdn Kai 
orepeay éxee tiv dvow GmAov yap atry Svvams (cf. 
P.A.651 b 21). | 

(28) (C) From this usage it is not far to the idiomatic, pleo- Idiomatic 
nastic usage, ¢.g., 7 Tav évrépwy Sdvayis (almost=7va Usage. 
évrepa P.A. 678 a 13); 4 rev amrepav Sivas (=Ta wrEpa, 

682 b 15); and this is-paralleled by the similar usage 

le terme Sivayuss dans les dialogues de Platon, Paris, 1919, and A. Keus, 
Uber philosophische Begriffe u. Theorien in den hippokratischen Schriften, 

eg ety pp. 46 ff. 
a § 40. » vos is used in a similar context at 753 a 35. 
li 

Dynamis in 
generation. 

Associated 

with - 

**move- 
ment.” 

ARISTOTLE 

of duats, ¢.9., 7) Tv darpaKxodéppww dias (G4. 761 b 24), 
% Tob aidoiov ddas (717 b 183 cf. also 755 a 20), Trav 
mrepav dda (749 b 7, a striking instance, because 
gvais is used in an entirely different sense, “* Nature,” 
in the very next line); and even overaats is sometimes 
used in a similarly weakened Sense, €.9., a TOv Opxewy 
avorans (GA. T17 a 15), q TOY KaTapyvioy adoracs 
(G.A. 727 b 33); and ovcracis appears in two manu- 
scripts as a variant for dda at G.A. 717 b 20. 

(29) (D) In the passages dealing with the réle of the. male 
parent in generation we find phrases such as “‘ the 
dvvauis in the semen,”’ “ the dvvayis in the male ”’ (e.g., 
726 b 19,4 727 b 14, 729 b 27, 730 a 3, a 14, 736 a 27, 
etc.). The meaning of Sdvopus here would appear to be 
fundamentally the same as that dealt with in § 26 above, 
i.e., ddvayus here is the physical substance by means of 
which impregnation is effected; and the distinctive 
physical characteristic with which we find this Svvapus 
closely associated by Aristotle is ** vital heat ” or “* Soul- 
heat.” ° The most distinctive characteristic, however, 
of this substance is that it is charged with a i 
“movement,” capable of constituting and developing 
an embryo out of the matter supplied by the female ; 
and hence we also find a close association of d¥vayus 
with xivnois.° ‘This is the most important extension of 
dvvayis in its ancient sense made by Aristotle, for it links 
up the old sense of the term with the typically and 
peculiarly Aristotelian sense of 5vvayus=‘* potentiality ” 
(see §§ 34 ff. below). 

(30) (E) Under the same category comes the use of dSvvayus 
and ddvvapia as applied to male and female respectively 
(G.A. 765 b 9 ff., 766 a 32 ff.), for these are explained 

- by Aristotle as the ability and inability respectively to 
effect ‘‘ concoction ” of the ultimate nourishment (blood) 
into semen, and this is directly dependent upon the pos- 
session of sufficient “* natural heat.” 

« An interesting example, because dovayer (= potentially) occurs in the 
previous line. 
8 . Pipes ot to be confused with the ordinary Sivayis “Oepusy ’’; see App. B 
18, 
ec References for 8¥vayis associated with “‘ vital heat’’ and xivnots, 
e.g., 726 b 19 ff., 729 b 6 ff., 738 b 12, 739 b 24, 740 b 30 ff., 767 b 17 ff. 
(cf. 755 a 20 “‘ the vous of the Soul-heat’’). See also xivnois, § 50. 

lii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

(31) (F) Under the same category too must be placed the use 
of the term 8dvajius in the remarkable discussion on 
heredity in Book IV. | This is admittedly a particular- 
ized use of the term,* and Aristotle carefully explains its 

~- meaning when he first introduces it (767 b 23 ff., q.v.). 
But here too it is applied to special and distinctive char- 
acteristics, be it those of genus, species, or individual, 
--and therefore this use of it stands in the same line of 
“suecession as the meaning already described in §§ 24 ff. 
As for the way in which Aristotle conceived these 
‘dvvapers to operate, it is clear that, as they were present 
both in the semen and in the menstrual fluid (see /oc. 
eit.) and gave rise to xwjces (767 b 36), they must have 
been ter Veet associated with Soul and inherent in its 

instrument pneuma. 
(32) It may be noted here that the physical substance con- 
" cemed t the theory of generation is pneuma 
substance “ analogous to aither, 5 the “ fifth element,” 

ti the ** element of the stars ”’), with which Soul is “ associ- 
ated”; and it is this pneuma which Soul charges with 
a specific “ movement ’’ and uses as its “ instrument ” 
in generation just as it does in locomotion, and as an 
___ artist uses his instruments, to which he imparts ‘* move- 
_ ment,” in order to create his works of art. (For fuller 

details about pnewma, see App. B, and ef. § 45.) 
_ (33) Thus 8dvayis, even at its most glorified, still retains the 
marks of its descent from the historic 3vvayis of the 
early medicine, for, although Soul-heat is something 
different from the old @epudév and superior to it, neverthe- 
less it is still Pepucv. And there is another respect in 
which its descent is still to be seen, though this time it 
may be fortuitous and perhaps no more than a verbal 
eoincidence. This physical substance is the vehicle for 
the activity of Form (<lS0s);_ and in the Hippocratic 
treatise 7. dpyains inrpixjs each of the innumerable 
physical substances known as duvapers: had also been 

] called an «fdos. 

(34) (G) We now come to the last and most xa roe Aris- 
totelian of the meanings of dvvayis ; and although it is | 

bh « And therefore I have felt justified in translating ce faculty ”’ a 

¥i may perhaps be simply an extension of the meaning dealt with in 
the last section but one. 

Pneuma, 

Continuity 
in meaning 
of dynamis. 

Dynamis as 
aie 

Association (35) 

of dynamis 
with 
‘*move- 
ment,” 

« Potenti- (36) 

ally” and 
“in actnal- 
ity.” 

ARISTOTLE, 

usually considered independently of the ones we’ have 
already described, it is clear from Aristotle’s own words 
that he did not so regard it himself, for he associates 
it very closely with xivnow. In Met. A 1019 a 15 ff. 
and © 1046 a 10 f., he defines the primary and funda- 
mental sense of d5vvapyis in this connexion in the following 
words : Svvayus is apy?) kwyicews 7 petaBodjs ev érépw 7 
q €repov : Svvayus is a principle (or source) of xivnois or 
of change—a principle either (a) subsisting in some 
other thing than that which is to be affected by the 
knots or change, or (6) subsisting in the thing itself qua 
other than changeable in that respect. An example of 
(a) is building; an example of (5) is the science of 
medicine in the case of a person who is being healed but 
not qua being healed (a man doctoring himself), That 
is the fundamental sense of this du; ; but Aristotle 
goes on at once to mention the complementary sense of 
it, which in fact is the sense in which he commonly uses 
it, viz., the dvvayis of being acted upon (zaeiv), which 
he describes as the dpyy in the thing acted upon of a 
passive change caused either by some other thing or by 
itself qua other (7 ev ait@ 7H mdcxovte apy} petaBodAjs 
mabnrixis bn addov 7 H aAAo). 

It is therefore clear that there is the closest possible 
connexion between this notion also of ddvayus and Kivn- 
ais: Svvasus is in fact the capacity to set up “* movement” 
or (more commonly) to be set in “movement”’; it is 
a “‘dynamic’’ conception. To say that A is B dvvayer 
(potentially) means that A is a Material Cause capable 
of being set moving with a certain xinos by a Motive 
Cause, which xivnois will result in A acquiring the Form 
of B, thus attaining the Final Cause (becoming a B 
itself). It is thus a conception which integrates the four 
Causes through the process of xivyots. 

The correlative of Svvdye (potentially) is evepyeia (in 
actuality) ; “* X évepyeia ’? means something in which the 
Form X has been realized—something which already 
possesses the Form X, and further, in the case of animals, 
something which can reproduce the Form X in other 
matter which is so far only “ dvvdper X.” 

Erroneous (37) Of all the possible translations or mistranslations of 

translations 
of dynamis. 

liv 

duvajus, ‘force’? is one of the most misleading ; for 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

there is nothing more fundamental in Aristotle’s—and 

-in his predecessors’—idea of dvvayss than that it is 
something natural; and the associations of the term 
“ force | oe run counter to this. Aristotle himself con- 
trasts ‘“ natural’? and “ enforced’ movement (see 
App. B § 22, and ef. 739 a 4, 788 b 27, Politics 1253 b 22). 
It is also important that any notion of a vague and 
indefinite urge, even (and perhaps especially) where 
Soul is involved, should be excluded ; for, as we have- 
seen, dvvayus is associated primarily with some material 
substance of a specific character or with some xivynas 
(carried in a definite substance) of a specific character. 
From every point of view it is best to avoid *‘ force 
altogether as a translation of dvvayus. 

Td bypdv xai 7d Enpdv, “fluid substance and solid 
substance ” 

(38) These are two of the original duvayes (§ 24); and Translation. 
following Ogle in his translation of PA. I use the above 
renderings as being more in conformity with the defini- 
tions given by Aristotle himself than ‘ moist ’’ and 
“dry ” which have sometimes been used. Actually 
neither pair of English words quite expresses the Greek. 
hed s definition of them (at G. & C. 329 b 30) is Definition. 

: ‘ dypov is that which is not bounded by any 
ela al of its own but can readily be bounded ; énpdv 
is that which is readily bounded by a boundary of its 
own but can with difficulty be ri de ; at the end 
of each definition there should of course be understood 
- by a boundary imposed from without.” (dypov i is 76 
adpiorov oixeiw Opw evopiatov dv, Enpov is To eddpiaTov ev 
oixeiw Gpw Svadpratov Be. 

Duppetpia, Kpacis 
(39) An idea which recurs a number of times in @.A. is that Correct pro- 
of cupperpia. In this treatise the majority of the refer- portion: 
ences * to oy, pia are concerned with the relative ‘ oe om 
amounts of residue contributed in generation by the two ® : 
« See list of passages in the Index. 
ly 

(b) in ethics 
and politics; 

(©) in bodily 
health. 

Blend. 

ARISTOTLE 

parents, or to the heat or “ movement ” contributed by 
the male or otherwise provided (e.g., by the Sun). 
Lvpperpos xivynots is also mentioned in connexion with 
the amount of fluid in the pupil of the eye (779 b 25; 
cf. 780 b 24). The meaning throughout is that the 
amount of substance, or of heat, must be adjusted in the 
correct proportion ; and this, as the context at 786 b 5 
indicates, means suitably adjusted between the two 
extremes of too much and too little. This at once recalls 
to mind the famous doctrine of the “‘ mean” in the 
Ethies, where goodness (or “ virtue,”” dper7) is held to 
be a mean between the two extremes of excess and 
deficiency ; indeed, at #.N. 1104 a 12 ff. Aristotle says 
that whereas the moral dperai are destroyed we excess 
and deficiency, they are produced and preserved by the 
mean, just as excessive food and drink destroy health, 
whereas 7a ovpperpa produce and preserve it.* Simi- 
larly, at Phys. 246 b 4 he says “* we posit that the aperaé of 
the body, viz., health and fitness, lie in the xpaats (blend) 
and cupperpia of hot things and cold,? either as regards 
each other internally, or as regards the surrounding 
environment ; and the same applies to the other dperai — 
and xaxia.” ‘This reference to xpadois and to the en- 
vironment is closely parallel to the most important 
passage on ovpperpia in G.A., 767 a 14 ff., where Aris- 
totle says that the male and female need cupperpia as 
towards each other, because all things formed by Nature 
or by Art Aéyw tui éotw—depend upon a certain pro- 
portional relationship, or ratio. Just as in cooking, the 
heat must strike the due proportion, the mean, or your 
meat will be either overdone or underdone.* So too in 
the mixture of male and female, ovpperpia is required. 
He then goes on to speak of the dependence of our 
bodily condition upon the xpa@os of the environing air 
(cf. 777 b 7) and of the foods we take, and especially 
the water. 

(40) This is not the place to discuss the origin of the doctrine 

« The importance of cuppmerpia in the growth of a State is also 
emphasized by comparing it with the growth of the body (Pol. 
Ch th mae d of th ts 

. the phrase Wuxpdrepa tis cuppérpov kpacews used of the par 
around the brain (P.A. 652 b 36). 
¢ Cf. § 16 above: 

lvi 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

of the mean, nor of the closely allied doctrine of xpaais, 
except that it should be noted that great importance is 
attached in the Hippocratic treatise 7. dpyains intpixijs 
_to securing nape xpaats for the ingredients of the food 
_ we take noe of the constituents of our bodies (the two 
_. sets of substances being identical); and that in 7. dvairns 
_ the xpaois of Fire and Water in the Soul is responsible 
for its health and sensitivity (cf. G.A. 744 a 30). Refer- 
ences to the pertinent passages of the Hippocratic 
treatises will be found in the notes; see also P.A. 
(Loeb ed.), pp. 37 f. It should also be noted that 
Alemeon of Crotona (Aétius vy. 30: see Diels, Doxographi 
442) held that health was the odpperpos av rou Kpaots 
(cf. § 25). It is important to realize that some, at any 
__ rate, of Aristotle’s terminology was the common property 
of scientific writers. 5 

i © Buya, “ Soul” 
(41) The English word Soul, as will be seen, owing to its 

_associations is not entirely satisfactory as a rendering 
_ of yuy7, but it is by far the most convenient one, and I 
have used it in preference to “ life *’ or ‘* vital principle ” 
(for which Aristotle employs other terms). 
(42) Animate bodies, bodies “* with Soul in them ”’ (éuivya), Soul the 
are “ concrete entities "’ made up of Form and Matter, Form of 
_ Soul being the Form and body the Matter; indeed, Body. 
Soul is the Form of the body. (Cf. G.A. 738.b 27, n., 
741 a1.) Aristotle also describes this relationship by 
saying that Soul is the “realization” (évreAéyeta, 
“actuality ”) of the animal body. Strictly speaking, 
Soul is the “‘ first realization ” of an animal body, for an 
animal can “ have Soul in it’’ and yet be asleep; its 
active, waking life will be its ‘‘ second realization.” 
Further, Aristotle tells us that Soul is the first realiza- 
tion of a body furnished with organs. The importance 
of this is clear: the body is for the sake of the Soul 
(because the Soul is the Final Cause as well); and 
hence (P.A. 687 a 8 ff.) Aristotle maintains that man 
has hands because he is the most intelligent animal, not, 
as some had said, the most intelligent animal because 
he has hands. Soul is * prior ” to body, and the body 
is such as it is because that is the sort of body the Soul 

lvii 

The 
faculties 
of Soul. 

Rational 
Soul. 

Soul 
subsists in 
pneuma. 

(43) 

(44) 

(45) 

lvili 

ARISTOTLE 

requires in order to function. Indeed, the Soul cannot 
function without a body ; it cannot, we may say, exist 
(De anima 414 a 19). RASS 
This will be clear if we distinguish the different parts or 
* faculties” of Soul. They can be arranged in a 
definite order, so that the pemeren of any one of them 
implies the possession of all those which precede it in the 
list; and it will be seen that all except the last of them 
obviously require a body for their functioning. 

(1) Nutritive and generative Soul,* in all plants ; 

‘3 sentient Pun ; in all animals ; 

3) appetitive Sou 7 bE 
(4) locomotive Soul, in some animals ; 
(5) rational Soul, in man only. 

It is the last faculty of Soul which stands out by itself. 
Aristotle feels that he cannot admit that Soul is wholly 
dependent upon body for its functioning ; there may, 
he says, be some “ part’? of Soul which is not the 
** realization ’’ of any body, a “‘ part” whose activities 
have nothing whatever to do with any physical activities 
(G.A. 736 b 28). This part, which is “ rational Soul,” 
comes in over and above, from without (@..4. 736 b 25 ff.), 
and continues to exist after the death of the body (De 
anima 413 a 6, b 24 ff., 430 a 22, etc., Met. A 1070 a 26). 
The problems raised by this belief are, however, not 
fully dealt with by Aristotle even in G.A., where he has 
much to say about the development of Soul in the 
embryo ; indeed, he nowhere offers any solution of 
them. : 

So much then for the theoretical relationship of Soul 
and body. What is their practical relationship? How 
precisely does Soul function through the body? The 
answer to these questions is one of the most striking 
parts of all Aristotle’s philosophical work. Soul, says 
Aristotle, is not, as some have wrongly supposed, Fire 
or any such stuff (Svvapus); it is better to say that it 
‘“ subsists in some such substance ”’.as Fire (é tovtrw 
7wi odpart ovveordvat), viz., in “ hot substance” (ro 
Oepusv), which is the most serviceable of all substances 
for the activities of Soul (P..A. 652 b 8); and elsewhere 
(G.A. 736 b 30 ff. ; see App. B § 13) he is more explicit. 

@ See also 744 b 33, n. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

This Bepyov is no ordinary @epudv, but it is pneuma, a 
substance “‘ more divine’ than Fire, Air, Water, or 
Earth, and “ analogous to” the fifth element, aither, , 
the element of the Upper Cosmos. It is this pneuma, 
and the substance (¢vo1s) in the pnewma, which is the 
vehicle of Soul, and it is pnewma which Soul uses as its 
“instrument,” through which it brings about KivOtS, 
both in moving the full-grown body and in “ moving’ 
i.e., developing the embryo. Here, then, we have 
reached the heart of the business : pneuma is the last 
physical term of the series; pnewma is the immediate 
instrument of Soul, and it is through preuma first of all 
that Soul expresses itself. 

(46) It must not be supposed that this pneuma is the breath This 
breathed in by the animal from outside; Aristotle is pnewmais 
most explicit on this point, and he often describes this “°°™™#*e-" 
pneuma as “connate” (cvpdurov). Owing to the 

important place of Xvudurov [vedua in Aristotle’s bio- 
logy, I have provided a full account of its nature and 
functions in Appendix B.* 

Kivyots 

(47) Kiros i is a term of wider range than the English “ move- Meaning. _ 
ment,” though it is useful to retain “‘ movement ” as a 
translation in order to preserve the line of Aristotle’s 
thought. Kémots is one department of perafodA7 (Change), 
of which there are three hives: 

Two, which are changes affecting odcia : 
(1) yéveouws, change from the non-existent to the existent ; 
(2) ¢@opa, change from the existent to the non-existent. 
And one, which Comprises changes affecting cate- 
gories other than ovcia 
(3) xivnos, change in existing things. 

(48) Kamas has three subdivisions : Varieties of 
(a) as regards Quantity : Growth and diminution ; ** move- 
(6) as regards Quality : “ Alteration ” (dAAotwais) ; ssiporsic 

# See also G. L. Duprat, La théorie du xveipa chez Aristote, Archiv f. 
Gesch. d. Phil. “XII (1899). 305 ff., and W. W. J aeger, Das Pneuma im 
A ype Hermes, XLYVIII (1913), 39 ff.; the latter als also gives a history of 

pneuma-doctrine. See also W. W. Jaeger, Diokles von Karystos 
(1938) and J. I. Beare, Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition from 
Alemeon to Aristotle (1906). 

lix 

ARISTOTLE 

(c) as regards Place: Locomotion (dopa), ae (i) ina 
circle, or fii) in a straight line. 

Sometimes Aristotle includes yeveors and $Oopd as a 

fourth subdivision of xivnos, thus making xivnos 

embrace every variety of change. (See also Met. A 

1069 b 8 ff.) 

Definition. (49) The definition of «ivgats which he pives at Phys. 201 

“ Move- (50) 
ment”’ and 
Form. 

“ Move- (51) 
ment’”’ 
derived 

from Soul, 

and from 
the 
Unmoved 
Mover. 

lx 

a ll ff. is this : i Tod duvdper dvros evreAdxera, 7} ToLodTov, 
Kinois éorw: ‘* Movement” is the realizing of that 
which is potentially X, gua potentially X. For example, 
to take the case of dMokooss, kivqats is the altering of a 
thing which is alterable, gua alterable ; and so wi th the . 
other modes of potentiality. 

It will be seen at once that, in order to set going the 
kwyces by which the various potentialities are to be 
resdiaedds Motive Causes are required. And the thing 
which causes the ‘‘ movement,’ says Aristotle (Phys. 
202 a 10), will always bring with it some Form (maybe 
some ovcia, or some quality, or some quantity), which 
will be a “‘ principle ”’ and a cause of “* movement.” In 
other words, the ‘‘ movement ”’ will be informed, deter- 
mined, characterized, in such a way that it will produce 
a thing which has a certain ovoia, or quality, or quantity. 
The agent (or Motive Cause), then, will set up in the 
material a ‘* movement ” which will result in the material 
which is potentially A becoming A in actuality, that is 
to say, in its acquiring the same Form as that which the 
agent possessed. And this result is brought about, 
generally, by the use of an intermediary, an “ instru- 
ment ”’ (see App. B §§ 6, 15), to which the agent imparts 
the ‘‘ movement ’” ’ for transmission. 

All these sorts of xivnais, Aristotle points out (De anima 
415 b 22 ff.), are derived from Soul ; they are not found 
apart from Soul. This is because Soul is the Cause 
(aivia) and principle (apy) of the living body: it is alike 
its Motive Cause, its, Final Cause and its Formal Cause 
(ibid. 415 b 8 ff.), and it is situated in the heart. We 
must not forget, however, that in the long run xivyots, 
at any rate Kinos of inorganic things, is due to the 
Unmoved Mover, from whom **‘ movement ”’ is mediated 
by the heavenly bodies to the Lower Cosmos (App. A 
§§ 3 ff.) ; and even in the case of living things (* ats 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

with Soul in them’), the heavenly bodies act as a 
Motive Cause, for ‘* man is begotten by man and by the 
seme Tacs App, A886, 9). 

Péveois, yiyver Gar 

(52) Biveou: as we have already seen (§ 47), is a process Meaning. 
of change ; in fact, it is the most. fundamental sort of 
change, viz., “‘ coming into being ” ; hence, the product 
resulting from a process of yévears is some odoia, for 
although some sorts of odcia persist eternally, there are 
others which are “ perishable,” i.e., which are subject 
to yé&veas and dopa (see App. A §§ 1, 12, 16). Indeed, 
the sort of ovcia produced by the yéveors with which 
our present treatise is concerned—animals and plants— 

_ is the otcia which Aristotle considers to have the best 
claim to the name (App. A § 18). 

(53) Téeos, and its verb yiyrvecfa, are terms of frequent Translation. 
occurrence in Aristotle, and especially in G.A. In the 
title of the treatise, yéveois is commonly translated 
* generation,”” and this is a Convenient rendering of it 
there; but we must not forget that yévecis also refers to 
the whole process of an animal’s development until it 

its completion; that is to say, yéveas 
includes the whole subject of reproduction and embryo- 
logy. In the body of the treatise “ generation ” is often 
not satisfactory as a translation ; nor is ‘‘ coming-to-be”’ 
particularly neat or indeed appropriate in a biological 
work. I have therefore commonly used “ formation,” 
“ process of formation *’ and the like to render yéveais, 
and for yiyvecfa ‘‘to be formed,” “‘ to come to be 
formed,” etc... 

Luvuetdvat, cvvicrac Gar 

(54) Another verb closely connected with yiyveo#a is the Meaning, 

verb ovwordva, which might almost be regarded as the 

active voice of yiyveo$u, though cvnordva tends rather 
to refer to the beginning of the process. It is specially 
frequent in passages describing the initial action of the 
semen in constituting a “* fetation ”’ out of the menstrual 
fluid of the female, and it is also used by Aristotle to 
describe the action of rennet upon milk, a parallel 

lxi 

and 
translation. 

“‘Organ- (55) 

izers.” 

« Feta- (56) 

tion’’: 
(a) in sexual 
generation ; 

lxii 

ARISTOTLE 

instance which he cites by way of illustration (739 b 23). 
LXunordva therefore denotes the first impact of Form 
upon Matter, the first step in the process of actualizing 
the potentiality of Matter. The meaning of cunordva 
therefore is plain enough, but there is no really con- 
venient English word to translate it; and in consequence 
makeshift devices have to be adopted. Sometimes I 
have used ‘‘ constitute,’ sometimes ‘‘ set,’ sometimes 
“cause to take shape”; and for cuvicracBar, which is 
also very frequent, ‘* set ” (intransitive), “‘ take shape,” 
“arise,” etc. I decided against “‘ composit,” chiefly 
because I found it essential to introduce the term “ feta- 
tion” for «vnua (q.v.), and as the two so often occur 
together, the outlandish phrase ‘‘ composits the feta- 
tion ’’ would have been frequently occurring. Never- 
theless, it would have represented Aristotle’s thought 
much more precisely, and for that reason alone I am 
convinced that it would have been amply justified. - 
Another possible rendering would have been “ organ- 
ize”? ; and indeed ‘‘ organizers ’’ is a term which has 
recently been introduced into embryology to denote 
substances which are responsible for bringing about the 
differentiation of the parts of the embryo, — It is interest- 
ing in this connexion to note that Aristotle seems to be 
working on’a similar theory in @.A. IV, viz., that there 
is a kinas (i.¢., a specific ‘* movement,” implying a 
dvvajus or specific substance) for each part of the body, 
which brings about its development in the embryo. 
We should, however, note that the “ organizers”’ are 
not found until after impregnation is effected, whereas 
the distinctive ‘* movements ”’ proper to sensitive Soul 
are ex hypothesi already in the semen. 

Kinpa 

This is a term which occurs very frequently in @.A. At 
728 b 34 we read that by xéqua is meant “ the first (or 
primary) mixture of male and female ”; and although 
the term is very often so used, it is also used by Aristotle 
to include more than this. Actually it covers all stages 
of the living creature’s development from the time when 
the “ matter ” is first ‘* informed ” (a common phrase is 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

a cpa ei ; See § 54) to the time when the creature 
is born or hatched. Hence we find «ina applied to the 
embryo or fetus of Vivipara ; to the “* perfect ” eggs of 
birds and to the ‘ imperfect ” s * of Cephalopods, 
etc. (733 a 24; they are still so’called after deposition), 
to the roe of fishes (741 a 37), and to larvae (758 a 12) ; 
indeed, the larva is compared with bo earliest stage of 
the «¢pa in viviparous animals (758 a 33). 
(57) In all the foregoing cases, the “ matter "’ for the «tna is (6) in spon- 
‘supplied by the female parent; but in the case of taneous 
spontaneous generation there is of course no female S°2™tion: 
: parent, and the xinua is formed, ¢.g., out of the sea- 
; water by the pneuma acting upon it (762 b 17). 

(58) There are, however, some ximpara which never reach the (c) infertile 
point of hatching (¢.g., ‘* wind-eggs ’); thus a «dna fetations; 
is not necessarily fertilized. Such a «ima is, however, 

1 to some extent “ informed ” and can develop up to a 

; point because it nutritive Soul potentially. 
__ (59) There is no English word which covers the wide range 
. of the term xvnua, and [ have therefore introduced the 

term “ fetation,” by which I invariably translate it. 

(60) Aristotle holds that the seeds of plants are “ as it were a (a) feta- 
xnpa,”’ because in them male and female are not separ- tions of 
ated; hence the seed of a plant begins with the male P!®"*s- 
factor and the female factor already mixed in it: and 
that is why only one stalk or plant can be formed from 

: one seed: there is no such opportunity available, as 
if there is in the case of animals, for the male dynamis to 
e “set ’ numerous fetations out of the material supplied. 

, ; . Nourishment, Residues, etc. 

(61) Several important terms in Aristotle’s technical voca- 
bulary are connected with the processes through which 
the food passes in the living body, and therefore an 
account of these processes will most conveniently explain 
the meaning of the terms. 
(62) After mastication, the food passes into the stomach, Concoction. 
where it is ““ concocted ** ® by means of the “ natural (or 
« See also § 77 below. ; 
® The Greek word for concoction is the same as that employed 

to denote the process of ripening or maturing of fruit, corn and 
the like by means of heat—also that of baking and cooking (see 

lxiii 

ee 

~ 

ee 

Blood. 

‘* Pneuma- 
tization” of 
blood. 

Two grades 
of nourish- 
ment, 

ARISTOTLE 5°"): 

vital) heat ’’ resident there. Any living thing (anything 
‘* with Soul in it’) possesses ‘* natural heat,” and the 
chief seat of the Soul and the source of the vital heat is 
the heart (or its analogue). But also, every part of the 
body as well has its own natural heat (¢f. 784 b 26 ff.), 
derived from the heart through the blood: thus, the 
stomach concocts the nourishment before pace Hon 
to the heart, and other parts may concoct it still er 
when the heart has sent it on to them. Beside the 
stomach, the liver and the spleen assist in the concoction 
of the nourishment (P.A. 670 a 20 ff.). Jul 

(63) Having received its first stage of concoction in the 
stomach, the nourishment passes on to the heart, where 
as we should expect it undergoes the most important 
stage of its concoction, and is thereby turned into blood, 
the ‘‘ ultimate nourishment ” for the whole body (P.A. 
647 b 5, cf. 666 a 8). It is probable that, in Aristotle’s 
view, an important part of this process was the “ pneuma- 
tization ” of the blood (see App. B §§ 31, 32), #.¢., the 
charging of it with Lvpduror [vedya and with the special 
‘* movement ”’ requisite to enable it (a) to maintain 
the ** being ” of the animal and () to supply its growth. 

(64) These two functions of nourishment, fom the consequent 
distinction of two grades of nourishment, which is made 
by Aristotle at 744 b 33 ff. (where see note ; and ef, list of 
passages in the Index), enable us also to distinguish the 
different classes of residues. The first-grade nourish- 
ment (a), which is described as ‘‘ nutritive ” and “* semi- 
nal,’’ provides the whole animal and its parts with 
“being ’’; the second-grade (>) is described as “ growth- 
promoting,”” and causes increase of bulk. In the 
development of the embryo, it is the leavings of the 
first-grade nourishment, or “ nutritive residue,” left 
over after the ‘“‘ supreme parts *—flesh and the other 
sense-organs—have been provided for, which are used 
to form the bones and sinews; the second-grade, 
inferior, nourishment (which is taken in by way of 
supplement from the mother or from outside) is used to 
form nails, hair, horns, etc. The latter is more “ earthy ” 

715 b 24, n.). Indeed, the processes are regarded by Aristotle as being 
fundamentally identical, (Cf. 743 a 31 ff.) It is also applied by him 
to the ‘‘ maturing ’’ of the embryo (719 a 34). 

lxiv 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

than the former; indeed, with such residue in mind, 
_ Aristotle can say (745 b 19) that “ residue is unconcocted 
substance, and the most unconcocted substance in the 
body is earthy substance ” ; see also § 66 below. 
(65) Generally, then, more blood is produced than is required Residues : 
for the purposes mentioned at the end of § 63, and the 
lus may then undergo a further stage of concoction, 
Nature is often able to turn it to some useful purpose 
(ef. § 8 above).. These are the useful ‘‘ residues,” and (a) useful ; 
ature has provided each with its proper place (G.4. 
725 b 1); indeed, it is only in its proper place that each 
“residue” is formed (739 a 2). Examples of useful 
residues are semen, menstrual fluid, milk. Marrow, 
_ which gives the backbone coherence and elasticity, is 
produced when “ the surplus of bloodlike nourishment 
is shut up in the bones’ and concocted by their heat 
(P.A. 652 a 5,a 20). Sometimes, when the nourishment 
is particularly abundant, the surplus blood is concocted 
_into fat, such as lard and suet (651 a 20).. Also, some 
_ of the blood, reaching the extremities of the vessels in 
which it is carried, makes its way out in the form of 
_ nails, claws or hair.* 
(66) Residues may appear at various stages (725 a 13) ; they (0) ambigu- 
may appear before, as well as after, the nourishment ous; 
has been turned into blood ; and then they are residues 
_of “ nourishment at its first stage”; thus (653 a 2, ef. 
458 a 1 ff.), after a meal, the nourishment rises as vapour 
through the vessels to the brain, where it is-cooled, and 
then condenses into phlegma and ichor (serum). But 
both of these, it seems, may also be useless résidues, for 
at 677 b 8 phlegma is mentioned in company with “ the 
sediment from the stomach,” though perhaps it is most 
often a residue of the useful nourishment (725 a 14). 
Ichor, too, the “‘ watery part of the blood,” is sometimes 
unconcocted blood, sometimes corrupted blood (653 a 2 ; 
cf. 458 a 1 ff., 651 a 15; no doubt ef tt d\Xo tovodrov at 
G.A, 725 a 15 refers to iehor). 
(67) Residues, then, are “ the surplus of the nourishment ” () useless ; 

@ The Aristotelian doctrine of “‘ residues ’’ came down to Shakespeare, 
as is shown by the passage in Hamlet (III. Iv), where the Queen says 
to Hamlet: 

** Your bedded haire, like life in excrements, 
Start up, and stand an end.”’ 

-" 

oe 

lxv 

(d) un- 
natural : 
Colliques- 
cence. 

Generative 
residues. 

Source of 

ARISTOTLE 

(724 b 26); but there are useless as well as useful 
residues, for residue may come either from the useful 
or the useless nourishment (725 a 4). Useless nourish- 
ment is “ that which can contribute nothing further to 
the natural organism, and if too much of it is consumed 
it causes very great injury to it” (725 a 5 ff.). Among 
the useless residues are the excrements; these are 
natural useless residues ; but there are also some un- 
natural ones, as has already been hinted. Among them 
perhaps should be included bile, which serves no useful 
nachaps whatever. It is a residue produced by the 
iver (677 b 1), it is the residue of blood in those animals 

which are made out of less pure blood ; it is merely a 

“necessary ’’ product, an “‘ offscouring,”’ a ‘* colliques- 

cence.” Colliquescence (ovrrnypa, avvrngis) is defined 

at 724 b 26 ff. as that which is produced as an aaéxpiois 
from the material that supplies growth, as the result of 

decomposition proceeding contrary to Nature” (70 
droxplev ex rod avéjparos bmd THs mapa dvow avadicews). 
Colliquescence, then, is an unnatural residue,* and 
therefore there is no proper place set apart for it by 
Nature (725 a 1); it just runs about wherever it can 
in the body. (See also 726 a 11 ff.) Colliquescence is 
a very common term in the Hippocratic treatise zepi 
dcairns, where its effect is said to be the production of 
an unhealthy dzoxpcis (abscession), and both there and 
in Aristotle daéxpics is specially associated with re- 
sidues, useful, or useless, or even harmful ones. A 
great deal of 7. dvairys is taken up with suggestions for 
getting rid of harmful dzoxpices. 

(68) ‘The most important residues so far as G.A. is concerned 
are of course semen and menstrual fluid { natural and 
useful residues, for which Nature has set apart special 
places in the body. The difference between them is one 
of degree of concoction : semen is a residue of the final 
stage of useful nourishment (726 a 26); so is menstrual 
fluid (738 a 36), but the female has not sufficient natural 
heat to carry the concoction far enough to duce 
semen. Hence, the difference between male and female 

« It seems however that a “ colliquescence *’ may sometimes be a 

natural residue, for at P.A. 677 a 13 bile is said to be ‘‘ a residue or a 

colliquescence,”’ and it is classed with the sediment in the stomach and 
intestines. See also P.A. (Loeb ed.), pp. 38 f. 

lxvi 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

is to be traced back to the innermost source of the sex-differ- 
organism, viz., the heart; the sexual organs may serve Pace is the 
as an outward expression of the difference, but the “* 
difference is not due to them. Like the blood, of which 
it is a more fully concocted form, semen derives its 
character primarily from the heart; where the blood is 
pneumatized and charged with the requisite specific 
* movements ” (see § 63 and G.A. 737 a 19). Semen, 
therefore, like blood, is the vehicle of “ Soul,” and 
especially so in virtue of the Xvudurov Ivedua which 
it contains, for Xy; ov Ilvedua is the physical sub- 
stance with which Soul is most intimately “‘ associated.” 
In terms of Soul, the difference between semen and 
menstrual fluid is that semen possesses the principle of 

_ sentient Soul, menstrual fluid possesses only nutritive 
Soul (potentially): the fluid has not been charged with 
the “*‘ movement” proper to sentient Soul owing to 
deficiency of heat in the female. The other “ move- 
ments” in these generative residues are a most important 
factor in the determination of generic, specific, sexual, 
and even individual characteristics: see the discussion 
in G.A, IV. 766 a 13 ff., 767 b 15 ff. 

(69) It should be noted that the heat both of blood and of Heat of 
semen (the concocted residue of blood) is not inherent, blood and 
but is acquired from a source other than themselves. 0fseme" 

The logos of blood, it is true, includes the term “ hot,”’ herent but 
but only in the same sense that the logos of “* boiling ‘acquired.’ 
water” (if we had one word for that as we have for 
blood) would include the term “ hot.’ In other words, 
' the permanent substratum of blood is not hot; and 
thus, although in one way blood is “ essentially ” hot, 
in another way it is not “ essentially * hot (P.A. 649 b 
21 ff.). Similarly, the “ matter ’ of semen is “ watery ” 
(i.e., the substratum of it is the Element Water; cf. 
736 a 1 and preceding passage); and its heat is a 
supplementary acquisition (érixrnros: G.A. 747 a 18, 
cf. 750 a 9, 10). The explanation of these statements, 
as will be obvious from the preceding sections, is that 
blood is produced by the heat of the heart out of the 
fluid matter supplied by the stomach from the food 
(§ 63), and semen of course has to undergo still further 
Gee by the vital heat in the appropriate parts 
§ 62). 

lxvii 

ARISTOTLE 

Two modes of diff erence ; Blood ; Classification 
of Animals 

(1) ‘The (70) Differences “* by the more and less,” or “* of exceks and 

more and 
less.” 

deficiency differences of degree, as we should say, 
are minor differences such as are found as between 
different species of one and the same genus or of any 
iss er group. Thus (P.A. 6444.19, 692 b 24) the parts 

irds differ in this way, some having long legs, or 
oe ee others short ones ; somea ae tongue, others 
a narrow one, Again, the male will have the same 
defensive or offensive organ as the female, but “‘ to a 
greater degree,’’ and this sometimes holds good of 
organs essential for food and nutrition * (661 5 28 ff.). 
Difference “* by the more and less ” can also be applied 
to skin, blood-vessel, membrane, sinew: these are 
substances. which. differ among themselves in this way 
(G.A. 737 b 4; of. 739 b 32). 

@) (71) Where the divergence i is wider, as for instance between 

** Counte 
ea og 

(72) 

different groups of animals such as birds and fishes, 
the difference is no longer 7@ paAdov Kai #rrov, but 7d 
dvédoyov (P.A. 644 a 21): the corresponding. parts, 
e.g., the feathers of birds, the scales of fishes, and the 
scales of reptiles, differ ‘‘ by analogy,” i.e., they are 
merely the ‘‘ counterparts,’ the ‘‘ opposite numbers ” 
of each other, as indeed the large groups of animals 
themselves may be (see G.A..761.a 27-and context ; ef. 
also 784 b 16 ff., and 737 b 4, n.). 

Many examples of this usage occur in G.A.; we find 
mention of 70 dvdAoyov of the heart ; of the blood, and 
of the menstrual fluid, in bloodless creatures ; of teeth ; 
of flesh; of fat; of hair ; of sinew. Menstrual fluid 
in females is avaAoyov to semen in males (727 a 3); we 
might have expected this difference to be only a differ- 
ence “ by the more and less,” but no doubt the reason 
why it is a wider divergence is that menstrual fluid lacks 
sentient Soul (see § 68). The most frequent references 
to 70. avaAoyov in G.A. are the counterparts of the heart 
and of the blood. And the most important of all the 
counterparts is of course “ the substance in the pneuwma,” 

a Cf. the view that the female is a “* deformity,”’ § 13, 

lxviii 

a, eae ama 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

caer aba papeclanaptinenityroaciegmetl 

736 b 37 

nob. It should be noted that by “* blood *’ Aristotle means red 
blood only, and he makes a division of animals into 
** blooded * (€aua) and “* bloodless ” (dvarza). These 
two classes do not quite coincide with vertebrates and 
invertebrates, for there are some invertebrates which 
have red blood, e.g., molluses (Planorbis), insect larvae 

(Chironomus), and worms (Arenicola). In other 

invertebrates the blood may be blue (Crustacea and 
most molluscs) or green (Sabellid worms), or there may 
be no respiratory pigment at all (most Insects). 

(74) — following table shows how Aristotle’s division 

out: 
Blooded animals Bloodless animals 
Man. Crustacea. 
Viviparous quadrupeds. Cephalopods. 
Oviparous quadrupeds and I 
footless animals (=re Testacea. 
tiles and amphibians). 

Birds. 

Fishes. 

It may be convenient to give here the Greek names used 

by Aristotle for the four classes of Bloodless animals, 

together with their literal translation and the terms 

which I have used to translate them: 

im padaxdorpaxa soft-shelled animals Crustacea. 
softies Cephalopods. 

Ta &vropa ‘insected animals Insects. 

Ta dorpaxddeppa shell-skinned animals Testacea.* 

Blood. 

——_ 

Bloodless 
animals, 

(75) The Testacea were a source of considerable embarrass- The 
ment to Aristotle, who considered them to be inter- Testacea. 

mediate between animals proper and plants. Nor, 

according to him, did they uce sexually, but arose 
from spontaneous generation. In his treatise on the 
Progression of Animals, he defers mention of them to 

# In using “ Testacea’’ to translate ra sexpaxétcoue (“the animals 
with earthenware skins *’) I use it in the old-fashioned sense, so as to 
include a number of shelled invertebrates, comprising Gasteropods, 
Lamellibranchs, and some Echinoderms. Modern zoologists ee eee the 
— Testacea to the Foraminifera, which are shelled Protozoa. 

term Ostracoderms (a transliteration of Aristotle’s word) is now aes 
by zoologists to a group of primitive fossil fishes. 

Ixix 

Classifica- (76) 

tion 
according to 
method of 
reproduc- 
tion. 

** Perfect 
animals. 

Distinction (77) 

of ‘* per- 
fect’ and 

“imperfect” 
eggs. 

Distinction 

of egg 
and larva. 

Ixx- 

ARISTOTLE 

the very end and then says that strictly speaking they 
ought not to move about at all, yet in fact we see them 
moving : anyway, their movement is “‘ contrary to 
nature,’’ because they “ have no right and left .” (The 
mechanism of their movement can be detected only by 
the microscope, and is known as ciliary.) — 

In G.A., however, although Aristotle adheres to his 
classification into Blooded and Bloodless animals, per- 
haps a more important classification is that which i 

based upon their method of reproduction. This classi- 
fication will be found in the Contents-Summary, 
pp. lxii ff. And in this connexion we must notice that 
the list is headed by the Viviparous animals, of which 
the first is Man: these are the “ most perfect animals,” 
and therefore they produce their offspring in the most 
perfected condition. And by “ most perfect ”’ (732 b 29) 
Aristotle means the animals which are “ in their nature 
hotter and more fluid (dypdrepa), and are not earthy ”’ ; 
and, as the test of natural heat is the presence of the 
lung, and further, a lung well supplied with blood, no 
animal can be internally viviparous unless it respires. 
(See the whole passage 732 a 26—733 b 16.) 

It should be noted that Aristotle clearly distinguishes 
between what he calls ‘ perfect ’’ and ‘ imperfect ” 
eggs, that is to say between eggs which do not and those 
which do increase in size after deposition. This is the 
basis of the modern distinction between cleidoic and 
non-cleidoic eggs (see 718 b 7, n.). He also clearly 
distinguishes between an egg and a larva: .an egg is 
that from part of which the young creature is formed, 
the remainder serving as nourishment for it; a larva 
is something of which the whole is used to form the 
young animal. . (See 732 a 29 and note, and 758 b 10 ff.) 
The fact that Aristotle drew these distinctions so clearly 
is particularly noteworthy. ._ He was, of course, unaware 
of the existence of the mammalian ovum, which cannot 
be detected without the aid of the microscope. It 
should also be noted that Aristotle compares the growth 
of a non-cleidoic egg with the action of yeast in fermenta- 
tion ; see 755.a 18. 

2 

10 
12 

17 

CONTENTS-SUMMARY 

of Baraca 

The uvitea! The Motive and Material Caucn of animals 
_, are the main theme of G@.4. 

The Sexes 

(a ) Distinction of sexes not universal. They are (a) found in 
f blooded animals, and in Cephalopods and Crustacea, 
in all Insects ; (b) not found in Testacea. 

©) Betiniton of male and female :_ they are the “ principles ”’ 
of generation, the fala: Scarier the motive agent and 

the female the material. Hence a corresponding differ- 
ence in the sexual parts, which vary in the various animals, 

but are always double. 

1—Sexrual Parts in Blooded Animals 

ig The of testes. 
8 () Sexual oe parts in 2 pele purpose 
3 Ovipara laying apverute eggs. ; 
2) Ovipara laying perfect eggs 
(3) Trapipars (Selachia a vipers). 

4 
(ce) pd vivipara remarks on position of sexual organs. 
2—Copulation of Bloodless Animals 
) 

Crustacea. 

'(b) Cephalopods ember ged reference to the hectocotylized 
arm of the Octopus 

(c) Insects : some Cy ae soueretod by copulation, copulate, 

uce 

some (2) are omematall spontaneously, copulate, 
and produce larvae ; 

sat @) are generated spontaneously and do 

} includes sade senies: spiders, wasps, ants ; 
fleas, flies, can’ tharides 
®) gnats, mosquitoes, etc,” 

3—Theory of Sexual Generation 

(A) What is the nature of semen ? 
(a) Theory of “ pangenesis*’ examined and refuted by 

ous arguments. 
(5) Definition of semen : it is that “ from ** which natural 
objects are produced. It is one of the “ residues ’’—a 

residue of useful nourishment in its final form— 
not a ym ggg 
(B) Beerul fluid. _This also is a residue, similar to semen, 
ut less concocted. It is the matter for generation. Since 
oe prod provides the form, several offspring may be 
originated by one semen. 
(C) (a) Elaboration of the theory of generation. 

lexi 

ABISTOTLE |! TY) 

CH. 

Be ee (b) The female cannot generate alone because it cannot 
provide the form (viz., sentient Soul). Semen is the 
“instrument ’’ used by Nature, charged the 
“movement ’’ which conveys the form. - ; 

23 (c) Comparison and contrast of animals and plants. 
Sexes are not separate in plants because reproduction 
is almost their only function. 

II. 1 (D) The Frnat Cavss of the existence of the Sexes. They sub- 
serve generation, the perpetuation of the species, and this 
is the way by which “ perishable ’’ things are able to 
partake in eternal “‘ being.’’ ‘ ~ 

Classification of the various methods of Generation 

Note on the difference between an and a larva. 

The classes (Vivipara, Ovovivipara, Ovipara laying perfect 
egg, Ovipara laying imperfect egg, Larvipara) do not 
correspond to differences in the organs of locomotion, but 
to the degrees of ‘ perfection ’’ of the animals concerned, 
the most perfect being those which are hot, as is shown by 
the fact that they breathe. 

(1) es that are hot and fluid. Viviparous. Man, 

ete. 

(2) Animals that are cold and fluid. Ovoviviparous. 
Selachia and vipers. : 

(3) Animals that are hot and solid. Oviparous (perfect 
egg). Birds and scaly animals. 

(4) lve a id bape Bes 95 pele (im- 
perfect egg). Fishes, Crustacea, Ce i) F 

(5) i i that are coldest of all. Larvi parous.® 
nsects. 

3 (resumed)—Theory of Sexual Generation 

(a) What is the agent that fashions the embryo? Preforma- 
tion versus epigenesis. It is the male parent, or rather 
the semen in which the parent’s “ movement ”’ is trans- 
mitted, which fashions the embryo, Thus the material 
(provided by the female), which is potentially a living body 
of a particular kind, is gradually actualized. The 
of the body—and of the Soul—are actualized successively : 
first the heart and nutritive Soul. 

2 (b) The physical character of semen. It is a foam, a com- 

pn of Water and pneuma. ; 

3 (ce) Does semen contain Soul? Yes—potentially; all the 

sorts of Soul which act through a body must be present 

first of all potentially. The problem of the entry of 
rational Soul. 

(d) The physical substance in which Soul is carried is pneuma, 
a “divine ’’ substance analogous to aither, the fifth 
element. ‘ 

(e) Menstrual fluid contains all the parts of the body poten- 
tially, but it lacks sentient Soul. 

@ The larva represents a stage previous to that of the egg, for, according to Aristotle, 
the larva develops into an egg-like object. 

lxxii 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 
Generation in Blooded Animals—I. Vivipara 
nid “rf gh net a lip ane 
(a) The secretion of the generative residues. Semen is not 
@ eee by all male animals. 

male—either by means of semen or directly —“ sets ”’ 
” he purest portion of the female’s residue and so produces 

tion. 
(e) Te development of the fetation. The heart is formed 
first, as being the seat of nutritive Soul. 
(d@) Theory of the action of the male factor on soe female. 

5 (e) The female cannot generate alone because it pth a sentient 
= (in some animals, however, the sexes are not separ- 

). 
6 (f) Sate Goxekopeeas of the fetation. The upper parts 
develop first (but not so in Insects and Cephalopods). 
(g) oad diterentiation of the parts is effected by means of 

(Oar The ander ot of development of the parts. 
ek epee if tena the ‘‘uniform’’ parts; nails, etc. ; 

and 
G) Heating and pee ee are employed as instruments in the 
development of the fetation. Necessity and purpose. 
(k) The beptn.; the eyes. 

(Dd ete. ' 
(m) Two moting of nourishment : “ nutritive’ and * growth- 

. (nm) 
7. (0) Froctcn of the umbilicus and cotyledons. 
(p) Hybrids ; sterility ; mules ; deformed animals. 

Generation in Blooded Animals—II. Ovipara (laying 
perfect eggs) 
Ill. 1 Birds and Quadrupeds. 

(a) General. 
(b) Wind-eggs 
(e) Difference between yolk and white : the white is hot and 

. is the seat of the Scapeneine. 

2 (d) Shape of the egg. 
(e) Growth, of the egg. 
(f) ee by pares animal (not needed for quadrupeds’ 

(9) Ponawiour of white and yolk during incubation. 
(hk) Description of the umbilical cords, etc. 

Generation i in Blooded. Animals—I/I. Ovovivipara (laying 
perfect eggs) 
3 Fishes (A) Selachia. 
(a) Description of the development of the embryo. 
(6) Differences as between Birds and Selachia (including 
reference to Mustelus laevis). 

lxxiii 

ARISTOTLE = 

Generation in Blooded Animals—IV. Ovipara see 
imperfect eggs) . : 

BK. 
TI. Pig Fishes (B) Fishes other than Selachia. 
(a) Growth of the egg: a process comparable with fermenta- 

tion 
5 (db) Erroneous theories : 
(1) h are not oviparous and have no sex distinction ; 
(2) swallo of mi 
6 (3) apocrypha methods of copulation in birds ; 
(4) stories about trochos and hyen 
7 Method of action of male birds and emt fishes upon the eggs 
contrasted. 

Generation in Bloodless Animals 

7 8 (A) Cephalopods and Crustacea. 
9 (B) Insects. 
(a) The larva is comparable to the earliest bye of an egg. 
All Insects, whether formed as a result of copulation 
or by spontaneous generation, originate from larvae. - 
(b) Development of the larva. 
(c) Bees. Hornets and Wasps. 

iL (C) Testacea: intermediate between animals nad ante 
Various animals proper to the various Elemen Moon- 
and Fire-animals. 

(a) Side-shoot (quasi-seminal) propagation, re 

(b) Spontaneous generation: the action of ma. The 
theory expounded. Traditional view of the origin of 
animals. The process of development resembles that 
of larvae. Examples of spontaneous generation. 

Origin of Sex-differentiation in the Individual and 

Inheritance 
Vit ae by dei theories : Anaxagoras, Episeiacles, Woaaoetlind, 
eophanes 
(b) The Pamaanbatal distinction between male and female is 
that the male can concoct and discharge sem the 

female cannot concoct or discharge semen, but can beoghed 
it: the difference of the sex-organs is consequent upon 
this distinction, and therefore the sex of the coves 
embryo is so too. Thus the ultimate source of sex- 
tion is the heart, which provides the vital heat Pecans 
for concoction. Further statement on the difference of 
formation of the sexual organs. 
2 (ce) Facts cited to. support theory 
(d) Imp rtance of eonnesPiy both internally and externally 
(“ blend ”’ of climate 
3  (e) Resemblance to parents. Theory of inheritance. 
(f) Fallings away from type: 
Male changes over to female. 
Father changes over to mother. 

Ixxiv 

- if ) J 
Father to grandfather, then to Ss cieceatina tiie. ete. 
Mother to grandmother, then to greatgrandmother, ete. 
This is applicable to the parts as well as to the whole body. 
) Further departures : unevenly develo individuals 
se ee ee r 
ists) 
io a} fancied resemblance to animals ; 
ee 2) with redundant parts ; 
)  eeyear g Ear 
see Gy Connexion of this ‘with the miniatier? of young produced. 
th i Beason for the redundance of pars 
formations. 

Vi GEBERB TION OF ASME 
CH. 
3 

Varia 

aon 

In human beings, more males born deformed than fe- 
The f femaie itself is a deformity, though a natural 
ormity. 

7 The mola uteri. 
8. Milk. The heart controls the production of milk, as 

_.. \\» does the production of the voice. Milk is concocted blood. 

ee Animals are born head first. 
0 Length of gestation-period. The periods of animals are 
cosmic periods. 

Perea a 
Degree of perfection of the young at birth. 
males 

governed by 

Secondary Characteristics 

1 Introductory. This part of the work is concerned with 
characteristics which are due entirely to Necessity (i.e., the 
pool and Material Causes), and in no way to the Final 

use. 

(a) Embryos are mostly asleep. 

(b) Colour of eyes. 

(ec) Keenness of sight, due (1) to the amount of fluid in the 
eyes ; (2) to the condition of the skin on the pupil. 
uait aim two anes oF “kneneens” *: ability to see at a 
distance ; ability to distinguish colours. 

(d) Keenness of smell and hearing. 
Digression on the inner mechanism of the senses. 

(e) spas thickness, curliness, rigidity, baldness and 
mo 

(f) Colour of hair, in man, and in other animals. 

(g) Coloration of animals. Colour of tongue. Seasonal 
ecolour-changes. General remarks on colour. 

(h) Voice. 

(i) Teeth: order of growth, e 

(j) The relation of the Matovict and Motive Causes (Necessity) 

to the Final Cause. 

ay at Ww Ww 

Ixxv 

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN 
THIS VOLUME ; 

H.A. 
te. 

G.A, 
IA. 
M.A. 

L.'& S. 

Worxs or ARISTOTLE 

Historia animalium 

De partibus anima- 
lium 

De generatione ani- 
malium 

De incessu anima- 
lium 

De motu animaliuwm 

Phys. Physica 

Met. Metaphysica 
Meteor. Meteorologica 
Pol. Politica 

ELN. Ethica Nicomachea 
Cat. Categoriae 

Dean. De anima 

De resp. De respiratione 

G. & C. De generatione et corruptione 

Oruer Works 

Liddell and Scott’s Greek-English Lexicon 
(1925-1940) 

Diels, Vorsokr. Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, by Her- 
mann Diels, fifth ed., edited by W. ae 

C.Q. 
C.R. 

Ixxvi 

1934-1937 

Classical Quarterly 
Classical Review 

Other abbreviations are self-explanatory. 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 
. PREFACE ‘ ' beatin at 4 ; ; v 
Aristotle’s Embryology . i : eae | 
Early Translations . : : ; oo) x 
The Text . : : S : . > ei 
Modern Editions ? , : a . XXxXii 
The Translation : array : - xxxiii 
Acknowledgements . : ; XXxvi 
INTRODUCTION ; ; : a : XXXViii 
Conrents-Summary or Dz GENERATIONE 
ANIMALIUM._... ; : . : . lxxi 
ABBREVIATIONS d , d ; “> lxxvi 
SIGLa . r ’ : : : . lxxviii 
TExT anD TRANSLATION : : . . 2 
TasiLe or Birps . é : : : . 3868 
DiacrRaM or Empryonic MEMBRANES . 369 
AppITIONAL NoTres ON THE TEXT . - . 562 
AppiTionaL Notes on Supsect-MatTrer . 565 
APPENDIX A : : : : : . 567 
Appenpix B : . : ; : . 576 
INDEX j , ; ; ¢ ‘ . 504 

lxxvii 

SIGLA 

Manuscripts cited throughout ¢ (AAS - 

Oxoniensis Collegii Corporis Christi W.A. 2. i Bree, 
Laurentianus Mediceus 81, 1. 

Vaticanus graecus 1339. 
Vaticanus graecus 261. 

“on N 

Manuscripts occasionally cited 

Parisinus 1921. 

OD Riceardianus 13. 

Es Parisinus 1853. 

All ss. readings are as reported by Bekker (by Busdemmalcet 

for EK at 723 b 5 and 769 b 34, and for m at 723 b 5 

and 768 b 36) except that 

* denotes corrected or additional reports of readings as 
given by Bitterauf (and twice only, for Z at 768 b 36 
and 786 a 3, as given by Susemihl). 

Readings and emendations 

D> Michael Scot’s Latin translation (either its actual 
words, or the original Greek reading clearly 
implied), from my own transcription. 

Gul. William of Moerbeke’s Latin translation. 
Aldus The Aldine editio princeps, Venice, 1497. 
vulg. The usual reading, as in the Berlin edition. 
Buss. Bussemaker, in the Didot edition. 

A.-W. Wimmer, in Aubert and Wimmer’s edition. 
Sus. Susemihl. 

Bt. Bitterauf. 

Rackham Suggestions in private communications to me 
y Mr. H. Rackham. 

Emendations fee proposals by other scholars are attributed 

to them by name (for references see pp. xxvii f.). 

{ ] Denote words wrongly placed or incorporated into the 
text. 

< > Denote (a) in the Greek text, words or parts of words 
supplied conjecturally ; 
(6) in the English, either the translation of words sup- 
plied in the Greek, or words required to complete the 
sense. 

a 7}, Z*, etc.=first hand, second hand, of Z, etc. 

lxxviii 

ZVOAAVOTZS & ee: 

EMMOIGN MIG 

a édiventa.  — aie 4. casa 

cosa ell. . i. 
ye aol as credence GSW IGA sO - TIPLE 1.  @tit 5 
. : Phe hod id 

ay MGTSDAS ei Tsy Ganley, 

qari 
“es ae . ar * 
: “Te 1O7 OK rN Eis whe 

Daas | aod ’ 

j 7 s e oe Yo : 
“4 Gngah 4073 43.. MIWA. as 

ee int SLBA. ior ¥ I 

: J 7 t 
LT FIR_ HOT. 

“4 

APIS TOTEAOTS 

ITEP] ZQION TENESEOS 
A 

> ‘ ~ nn 
715a I “Enel d€ mepi rév dd\Awy popiwy elpnrar Trav ev 
a 4 ~ 
tois Cwous Kai Kowh Kai Kal? Exaotov yévos zepl 
~ 07 * 
Tav idiwy xwpis, tiva tpdmov Sia THY ToLvadTHY 
airiav €otiv exaoTov, Aéyw dé radryv Thy evekd 
Tov’ vmdKewTat yap airiat TérTrapes, TO TE OD 
evexa ws Tédos, Kal 6 Adyos THs odcias (radra 
A s e a ‘ e a“ A / 
5 ev odv Ws Ev TL cyedov brodaPety Set), Tpirov 
\ \ / ¢€ WA A ¢ e > A ~ 4 
dé Kal Téraprov 7 vAn Kai dev 4 apyxi) TAS KW)- 
~ ‘ 
cews—trepl ev otv TOV GAAwy eipynta (6 TE yap 
Ao \ \ ee ¢£ c / > / \ A 
oyos Kal TO od Evexa ws TéAos TadTov, Kal VA 
10 Tots Cw@ous Ta pépyn, TavTi pev TH GAw Ta av- 
opoLopmeph, Tots 5’ avopovopepéor TA Opovopmeph, 

@ 4.e., in the De partibus animalium. 

® See Introd. § 18. ; 

¢ 7.e., the Final Cause appropriate to each part, either gua 
part belonging to all animals, or gua part belonging to some 
special group of animals, 4 See Introd. §§ 1 ff. 

® See Introd. § 10. t See Introd. § 11. 

9 See Introd. §§ 19 ff. 

2 

ARI STOTLE 

"GENERATION OF ANIMALS 
BOOK I 

_ Wrrx one exception we have now® spoken about I 
all the parts ® that are present in animals, both gener- [produe- 
_ ally concerning them, and also taking them group by 
group and dealing separately with the parts peculiar 
_ to each, and have shown in what way each part exists 
on account of the Cause which is of a corresponding 
kind: I refer to the Cause which is “ that for the 
sake of which ” a thing exists. As we know, there 
are four basic Causes 4: (1) “ that for the sake of 
which ” the thing exists, considered as its “ End ”’ ; 
(2) the logos’ of the thing’s essence (really these 
first two should be taken as being almost one and the 
same) ; (3) the matter of the thing, and (4) that from 
which comes the principle / of the thing’s movement. 
And with one exception I have already spoken about 
all of these Causes, since the logos of a thing and 
“that for the sake of which ”’ it exists, considered as 
its End, are the same; and, for animals, the matter 
of them is their parts (the non-uniform ’ parts are 
_the matter for the animal as a whole in each case ; 
the uniform parts are the matter for the non-uniform 

3 

715 a 

ARISTOTLE 

tovTos d5é Ta KaAovpeva oToiyeia THY GwydTwr), 
Aowrov S5é€ THY pev popiwy Ta pos THY yEeveow 
ovvtedAobvra Tots (wou, mept dv ovPev Siu@dprorar 
mpoTepov, Tept aitias 5é THs Kwovons, Tis avTn. 
To S€ mept ravTys oKomeivy Kal TO TEpl Tis 

15 yevéoews THs ExdoTOV TpoOTOV Twa TabToV éoTLY 

Sudmep 6 Adyos eis Ev ovvnyaye, Tov pev mrept 7a, 
Heopta. TeAcvTata Tabra, Tov d€ mepl YEveews THY 
apynv exouevnv TOUT rdgas. 

Tay on) Cope Ta pev ek ovvdvacpod yiverat 
OjAcos Kal appevos, ev daois yéeveot TOY Cwwy eort 

~ ~ > 
20 70 OAV Kal TO dppev: od yap ev maciv eotw, aA 

> \ a > / ” x\/7 oy A A 
ev prev Tots evaipos e€w orlywv damace TO -pev 
” \ \ a” / > an > > / 
dppev To d€ OFdv TeAcwwhev éom, TOV 8 avaipwv 
~ ¢ = 
Ta pev exer TO OHAV Kal TO Gppev, WaTE TA COMoyEevh 
yevvav, Ta Se yevva pév, od pevTor TA ye Opoyeviy: 
To.atra 8° €or doa yiverat pt) ek Cawv ovvdvalo- 
a / 
pevwv, GAN ex ys onmopévns Kal mepirTwparav.* 
Ws S€ KaTa TavTos eimeiv, doa fev KaTa Td7TOV 
petaPAntixa TOv Cadwv éori® Ta pev vevoTiuKa TA 
1 huc procul dubio transferenda vy. 715 b 25-30 €ori 8€ . . « 

iéds, quae ibi aliena, hic congrua. 
2 éo7i Peck: évra vulg.: locus hie corruptus. 

* Elements: ovorxeta. The term is a metaphor taken 
from “‘ letters of the alphabet, ” the original meaning of the 
term, In the physical sense, ‘‘element’’ may be defined as 
ef od ovyKEtTaL mpwrov éevuTapyxorToS GSiacpérov TO etdeu els 
Erepov eiSos (Met. 1014 a 26). See Introd. § 24. 

» 4.e., after the De partibus and the De incessu animaliwm. 

¢ See Introd. § 74. 

4 The exceptions are the erythrinus and. the channa: see 
741 a 35, 755 b 21; cf. 760 a8. 

¢ See Introd. § 67. Here probably=excrements: ef. 
H.A.551a6. See however 737 a 4, 762 a 3 ff. 

4 

b 

t 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. 1. 

parts ; and the corporeal “ elements,” * as they are 
called, are the matter for the uniform parts). Con- 
sequently, of the parts it remains to describe those 
which subserve animals for the purpose of genera- 
tion, about which I have so far said nothing definite, 
and of Causes we still have the Motive Cause to 
deal with, and to explain what it is. And, in a way, 
consideration of this Cause and consideration of the 
generation of each animal comes to the same thing : 
and that is why our treatise has brought the two 
together, by placing these parts at the end of our 
account of the parts,? and by putting the begin- 
ning of the account of generation immediately after 
them. 

Now of course some animals are formed as a result 
of the copulation of male and female, namely, animals 
belonging to those groups in which there exist both 
male and female, for we must remember that not 

‘all groups have both male and female. Among the 
blooded © animals, with a few exceptions,’ the indi- 
vidual when completely formed is either male or 
female ; but among the bloodless animals, while some 
groups have both male and female and hence gener- 
ate offspring which are identical in kind with their 
parents, there are other groups which, although they 
generate, do not generate offspring identical with their 
parents. Such are the creatures which come into 
being not as the result of the copulation of living 
animals, but out of putrescent soil and out of resi- 
dues. ‘Speaking generally, however, we may say 
that (a) in the case of all those animals which have 
the power of locomotion, whether they are adapted 

_ / The passage 715 b 25-30 should be inserted here, if 
anywhere. 
5 

Distinction 
of sexes not 
universal. 

V15a 

715 b 

ARISTOTLE) } 8 5 409 

dé ara Ta de melevriKd tois odpacw,: ‘ev 7AGt 
Tobrous eoTt' 7O OAV Kal TO dippev, ob spover? 
30 Tots evaipors, aAAa eéviows Kal dvaipous* Kal 
ToUTwY Tots bev Ka?’ GAov 7d yevos, ofov tots 
padaxtous Kal Tots padaxoorpdrots’ € ev 5é TO Tov 
evTOpeny yevet 7a TAciota. Tovtwy 8 adrav doa 
peev €k ovyduacpob yiverou TOV ouyyevaav Ldbwv, 
Kat ata yerva KaTa THY ovyyeverav? doa’ de, pH 
5 eK Cov aan’ ex onmropevns vis dns, Tatra dé 
verve pev erepov be yévos, Kal TO yeyvopevov 
oUTe OAAY € €oTW OUTE dppev. Towdra 8° éoriv ena 
TOV evropav. Kal TooTO ovpBeBnrev evAdyus" 
et “yap doa 7) ylyveTau eK foun, €K ToUTey 
eyivero Coa ovvdvalopeveny, ei pev Opovoyerij,. kal 
10 om ef apxAs TOLAUTHY ede TOY TeKvwodvTwv 
civae yéveow (robro S evAdyus aévoduev" paiverat 
yap ovpBaivov otrws émi tev aGAAwv Cobwv): € 
S° avépow pev dvvdweva dé ovvdvdleoPar, maAw 
€k ToUTwV erépa Tus av eyivero pvors, Kat aahy 
an Tis ek TovTwY, Kal TOOT emropever” dv els 
15 daretpov. 9 Se dvais pevyer TO diretpov" TO pev 
yap daretpov atedés, n d¢ duos det fnret rédos. 
doa O€ 47) mopevTuKd, Kabdmep Ta doTpakddeppa 
Tav Cow Kal ra COvta 7TH TpooTreducéevar, did 
TO TapamAnciav atr&@v clvar thy odotay ois 
dutois, Wamep odd év é€xeivois, odd ev Tovrous 
1 &y maou tovros eoti Z*: & éviows pev ToUTeY dav 70 yevos 

exer Vulg. * povov SZ povov ev vulg. 

; | Re PZ: GAdAa Kai TGv dvaipwv & row vulg. 
4 ouoyern PZ**. 

* See Introd. § 74. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. 1. 

_ to be swimmers, or fliers, or walkers, male and female 
_ are found ; and this applies not only to the blooded 
animals but to some of the bloodless ones as well. 
And among the latter, in some cases it holds good of 
a whole group, as for instance the Cephalopods and 
the Crustacea*; and it holds good of most of the 
Insects. Among animals of this class, those whieh 
are formed as the result of the copulation of animals 
of the same kind, themselves generate in turn after 
their own kind; those, however, which arise not 
from living animals but from putrescent matter, 
although they generate, produce something that is 
different in kind, and the product is neither male nor 

_ female. Some of the Insects are like this.? And 

this is what we should expect; for supposing that 
creatures which are produced otherwise than from 
living animals copulated and produced living animals: 
if these products were similar in kind to their parents, 
then the manner of their parents’ original generation 
should have been like theirs. This we may reason- 
ably claim, because it is evident that this is so with 
all other animals. If, on the other hand, the pro- 
ducts were dissimilar from their parents, and yet able 
to copulate, we should then get arising from them 
yet another different manner of creature, and out of 
their progeny yet another, and so it would go on ad 
infinitum. Nature, however, avoids what is infinite, 
because the infinite lacks completion and finality, 
whereas this is what Nature always seeks. (6) The 
ereatures which cannot move about, like the Tes- 
_ tacea and those which live by being attached to some 
surface, are in their essence similar to plants, and 

therefore, as in plants, so also in them, male and 

> See 732 a 25 ff., 758 b 6 ff. 
7 

715 b 
20 

ARISTOTLE — AG) 

€orl TO Orv Kat’ 70 appev, GAN 78n Kal? opor- 
TnTa Kal Kaz’ dvadoyiav Aéyerau* puKpav yap 
Twa Tovadryy exet Svapopav. kal yap év Tots 
purots dmdpxeu TA pev Kapmopépa. Svdpa Tob 
adtod yevous, TA 8° avTa prev ov dépet KapTov, 
avppdadrerar S€ rots dépovor mpos TO méTTEW, Olov 

25 ovpBaiver tepi THY OvKAV Kal TOV €ptvEdV. | 

30 

‘(Eon d€ Kal emi TOV puray TOV avrov Tpdrov- 
Ta pev yap é€K onépparos yiverau, Ta, 8 Gorep 
adroparilovons Tijs pdoews: yiverau yap % Tis 
yas onmoperns iY popiooy TWaVv ev tots porots: 
evi yap avra pe ov ovviotatar Kal” ada xwpis,” 
ev €Tépois 8 eyyiveras dévdpeow, oloy 6 ids.| _ 

1 quae sequuntur vv, 25-30 plane huc aliunde tralata, hic 
enim iamdudum de plantis sermo. transferenda censeo ad 

715 a 25 post mepurtwpdrwr. 
2 xwpis ex ys ZE. 

“ The concoction referred to here is that which produces 
the ripening of fruit. See Introd. § 62. The use of the 
same word zérrew both for the fruit of plants and for the 
semen of animals is appropriate, in that both, according to 
Aristotle, are produced out of “ nourishment” by a process 
of ‘‘ concoction.” fas 

> See 755 b 10, and H.A. 557 b 31. The tree com- 
monly cultivated in S. Europe is Ficus carica. ‘This species 
includes two kinds of individual trees : (1) those whose in- 
florescences contain fully-developed female flowers only ; 
(2) those whose inflorescences contain male flowers near 
the opening, and lower down aborted female flowers known 
as “ gall-flowers ” owing to their being specially prepared 
to receive the eggs of the fig-wasp (Blastophaga grossorum), 
which turns the ovary of the flower into a “ gall.” The 
latter trees are known as Caprificus. The female wasps, 
after impregnation by the male wasps within the gall, 
emerge from it and get dusted with pollen from the male 

8 

— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. 1. 

female are not found, although they are called male 
and female just by way of similarity and analogy, 
since they exhibit a slight difference of this sort. 
Thus among plants also we find that in one and the 
same kind some individual trees bear fruit, while 
some, although they do not bear any themselves, 
assist in the concocting* of that which is borne by 
the others: -An instance of this is the fig and the 
caprifig.? y 

¢{The same sort of thing is found in plants too: 
some are formed out of seed, others as it might be 
by some spontaneous activity of Nature—they are 
formed when either the soil or certain parts? in 
plants become putrescent, since some of them do 
not take shape * independently on their own, but 
grow upon other trees, as for instance the mistletoe 

flowers as they leave the inflorescence, and then pollinate 
female flowers elsewhere. Caprification is the name given 
to the artificial assistance of this process by hanging in- 
florescences of the caprifig on to trees of class (1). The 
growers believe that the fruit of the Ficus is improved by the 
wasps; but in fact excellent fruit is produced by these trees 
without pollination, though of course no fertile seeds. Hence 
caprification must be a traditional usage dating from the 
time when fertile seeds were required for propagation, which 
is now done by means of cuttings. See Kerner and Oliver, 
Natural History of Plants, ii. 160-162 ; H. Miller, Fertiliza- 
tion of Flowers, tr. p. 521 and bibliography. Cf. H.A. 
557 b 26 ff., where the wasp is mentioned. 

© The following sentence is obviously out of place here, as 
is shown (a) by the opening words, which must mark the 
beginning of a reference to plants, whereas here plants are 
already being discussed; and (4) by its inappropriateness to 
the particular point under discussion. It would be releyant if 
transferred to 715a25. Cf. H.A. 539 a 16 ff. 

2 Cf. 762 b 19. 

* See Introd. § 54. 

ARISTOTLE!) 

716 a Tlepi pev obv duTav, abra Kal adra. _ xeopis 
emioKkemtTéov. . 
II Tlepi dé THY dAwy Cawv Tis yevéoews pert 
Kara TOV emiPddrovra Adyov kal? ExaoTov aire, 
amo, TaV elpnpevay guvelpovras. aBdmep yap 
5 cimopev, Ths YEvegews apyas av THs ovy qKwora 
Oetn TO OfAw Kal TO dppev, 73 bev dppev ws Tijs 
KWATEWS Kal THs yevecews Exov ™Y apxyv, Td dé 
OAV ws dAns. tobto be pdduor® dv Tis morevaete 
Dewpav mas yiverau TO oméppia, Kat mdBev: ek 
TOUTOU pev yap Ta. pvoet yevdpeva ouviorarat, ToOTO 
10 8€ m@s amo Tod Oreos kal Tod dppevos cvpBatver 
ylyvesbar, Set pur) AavOdvew: TO yap amoxpivecBat 
TO TOLODTOV pOpLov aro TOD OyAEos Kal TOD appevos, 
Kal év TovTois THY amoKpLoww elvat Kal eK TOUTwWY, — 
dua TOOTO TO Oirv Kal TO Gppev apyat ris yeveoe@s | 
elow. appev pey yap Aéyomev C@ov TO els aNKo 
15 verve, OAAv Sé 76 eis add: 810 Kal ev TA Aw TH 
Tis viis poow ws OnAv Kal pnrépa svopdCovow," 
ovpavoy dé Kal Wrvov 7 7 Tt TOV dAAwy THv TowdvTwv 
ws yevvavras Kal marepas mpocayopevovow. int 
To & appev Kat To OAAv diadeper KaTa. HEV TOV 
Adyov 7TH Stvacbar Erepov Exdrepov, KATA ais ™7y 

i ei 

1 6vopatovow Z: vopilovow vel 

* Tt is impossible to represent the force of the Greek neuter 
in English. 

’ See note on Causes, Introd. §§ 1 ff. This statement, 
here unexplained and unjustified, will be fully dealt with 
later on. 

© See Introd. § 54. 

10 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. 1-m. 

~ Still, plants will have to be considered indepen- 
dently all by themselves. 

As far as animals are concerned, we must describe II __ 
their generation just as we find the theme requires Detnitio 
for each several kind as we go along, linking our and female. 
account on to what has already been said. As we 
mentioned, we may safely set down as the chief 
principles of generation the male (factor) ? and the 
female (factor) ; the male as possessing the principle 
of movement and of generation, the female as possess- 
ing that of matter.” One is most likely to be con- 
vineed of this by considering how the semen is formed 
and whence it comes ; for although the things that 
are formed in the course of Nature no doubt take their 
rise © out of semen,? we-must not fail to notice how 
the semen itself is formed from the male and the 
female, since it is because this part ¢ is secreted from 
the male and the female, and because its secretion 
takes place in them and out of them, that the male 
and the female are the principles of generation. By 
a “male” animal we mean one which generates in 
another, by “ female ’’one which generates in itself. 
This is why in cosmology too they speak of the 
nature of the Earth as something female and call 
it “ mother,” while they give to the heaven and 
. the sun and anything else of that kind the title of 
“ generator,” and “* father.” 

Now male and female differ in respect of their The sexual 
logos,f in that the power or faculty possessed by the P*"*s: 
one differs from that possessed by the other; but 
they differ,also to bodily sense, in respect of certain 

* Cf. the definition given at 724 a 17 ff., and also 721 b 6. 
* See Introd. § 18. 
* See Introd. § 10... With this passage cf. 766 a 18 ff. 

il 

716 a 

716 b 

20 

25 

30 

ARISTOTLE AAS 

aioOnow popios til, Kata pev tov Adyov 7H 
appev prev elvar 70 Suvdpevov yevvav eis Erepov, 
Kabdmep ehexOn mporepov, TO O€ OnAv TO €is adrd, 
Kal ef ob yivera evuTdpxov ev Ta yearns TO 
yevvaywevov. emel Se duvaper Sucbpuaras Kat epyy 
Twi, deirar 5é mpos méoav epyaoiav opydvev, 
opyava d€ rats Suvdpeot Ta, pEpn Too odparos; 
avayKatov elvat Kal mpos THY TéEKVWOW Kal TOV 
ouvdvacpov popia, Kal Tadra Suapepovr’ aMirov, 
Ka0o To appev dSioice: Tob O7/Acos. el yap Kal KaQ? 
ddov A€yerar Tod Lehov Tod pev 7d OFAv Tod Sé 76 
La > > > A ~ Al > Ae a * A 
dppev, aAX’ od Kara wav ye {ro} adro OAAv Kat 
” > , > \ 4 4, \ Pie, 
dppev eotiv, adAAa Katd tia Sdvapw Kal Kata Tt 
Hoptov, Womep Kal” dpaTiKoV Kal TopeuTLKOV, O7TEp 
Kat daivera Kata THY atoOnow. Tovadra dé Tvy- 
; , x a A , ¢ , 
Xaver popia ovra Tod pev OyAcos at Kadovpevar 
doTépat, Tod 5° appevos Ta TEpl TOUS Opxeus Kal TOUS 
mepweous ev maou Tols evatpows* Ta fev yap Opxels 

Ly > A s \ ‘ 4 / 23 Ky \ 
35 €xet adT@v, Ta 5€ Tods ToOLoUTOUS TdOpous. <Eial de 

diadopal tod OynAcos Kal appevos Kal ev Tots avai- 
pots, doa avrav exer TavTyV TV evavTiwow. dta~ 
déper 5° ev Tots evaipos TA pépy TA TMpOs THY lew 
Tois oxjpaow. det dé voeiy 6Tt puKpGs apyYs meTa- 
Kwovpevns ToAAG ovpperaBdrAdAew ciwbe TOV wera 

1 seclusit Rackham, om, Z!*. 2 xal PZ: Kai ro yulg. 

* The force of this important remark will be explained 
later. Cf. 734 b 35. 

’ Of. 166 b 2 ff.; also 729 b 12 ff. 

© This introduces what is to some extent a modification of 

12 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. 1. 

physical parts. They differ in their logos, because 
_ the male is that which has the power to generate in 
another (as was stated above), while the female is 
that which can generate in itself, 7.e., it is that out 
of which the generated offspring, which is present in 
the generator,’ comes into being. Very well, then : 
they are distinguished in respect of their faculty, and 
this entails a certain function. Now for the exercise 
of every function instruments are needed, and the 
instruments for physical faculties are the parts of the 
body. Hence it is necessary that, for the purpose of 
copulation and procreation, certain parts should 
exist, parts that are different from each other, in 
respect of which the male will differ from the female ; 
for although male and female are indeed used as 
epithets of the whole of the animal, it is not male or 
female in respect of the whole of itself, but only in 
respect of a particular faculty and a particular part ° 
—just as it is “ seeing” and “ walking” in respect 
of certain parts—and this part is one which is evident 
to the senses. Now in the female this special part is 
what is called the uterus, and in the male the regions 
about the testes and the penis, so far as all the 
blooded animals are concerned : some of them have 
actual testes, some testicular passages. There are 
also differences between male and female in those of 
the bloodless creatures which have this opposition 
of the sexes.. In the blooded animals the parts which 
serve for copulation differ in their shapes. We must 
note, however,” that when a small principle? changes, 
usually many of the things which depend upon. it 

the statement just made (716 a 27 ff.). And cf. the passage 
H.A. 583 b 31 ff. Cf. also 764 b 28, 766 a 24 ff. 
4 See Introd. § 11. 

13 

716 b 
5 

10 

Ill 

15 

20 

25 

ARISTOTLE ASO 

TH apynv. dfAov d€ Todo ent THv exrepvopevwr: 
TOD yevenruKod yap popiov SiapBerpopevov jedvov 
on oxedov 1 Hopdn ovpperaBdrrer Todorov WaTE 
7 OnjAv doxety elvar 7) puKpoV darohelmew, ws od 
KaTa TO TUXOV [dpLtov ovde KaTa THY TUXODGAY 
dvvapw OfjAv dv Kal dppev ro Cov. davepdv ody 
Ort apy) Tis obca paiverar 7d OAAV Kai TO appev- 
ToAAa yotv ovpperaBdder petaBadddévrewv 7 OAV 
Kal appev, ds dpxis peramimrovans. Lvt 

“Exe d€ Ta Tept Tous Opxets Kal Tas Sorépas 
ovx Opoiws maou Tots evaipous Cedous, Kal mp@Tov 
Ta Tept Tods Opxeis Tots appeow. Ta ev yap 
OAws dpxeis odK exer TAY ToLovTwY Cobwy, olov Td 
Te TOV ixOiwv yevos Kal TO TOV dhewv, GAAG 
mopous povov. Svo ameppatixots: ta 8 exer pev 
opxets, evtos O° Exe ToUTOUS TpOs TH dodve Kara. 
Thv TOV vedpdv xwpav, amo Sé to’rwv éxarépov 
Topov, Womep ev Tots fu1) ExovoW Opyels, ovVaT- 
Tovras eis €v, Kabdmep Kal én’ éxeivwr, olov ot TE 
dpviles TavTes Kal TA WOTOKQdYTA TETPAT0bA TAV 
dexouevwy Tov dépa Kal mAcdpova exovTwv: Kal 
yap tadra wdvta évTos €xet pos TH Cadve Tods 
dpxets, Kal vo wdpovs amd To’TWwY opolws Tots 
ddeow, olov cadpor Kat yeA@var Kai Ta PodkiBwra 

* In this passage Aristotle prefigures the distinction made 
to-day between primary sex-characters, i.¢., the genital organs 
themselves including testis or ovary; and the secondary sex- 
characters, é.g., the cock’s comb or the hen’s special feather- 
ing, which, as is now known, depend on the secretion of the 

14 

ee 

—_ 

awry 

aoe A ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. n.-1. 

undergd an accompanying change.* This is clear 
with castrated animals, where, although the genera- 
tive part alone is destroyed, almost the whole form 
of the animal thereupon changes so much that it 
appears to be female or very nearly so, which 
suggests that it is not merely in respect of some 
casual part or some casual faculty that an animal is 
male or female. It is clear, then, that “the male.” 
and “the female” are a principle. At any rate, 
when animals undergo a change in respect of that 
wherein they are male and female, many other things 
about them undergo an accompanying change, which 
suggests that a principle undergoes some alteration. 
The testicles and the uterus are not of similar III 
arrangement in all the blooded animals. Consider 
first the males, and their testicles. Some blooded 
animals (as the groups of Fishes and Serpents) have 
no testicles at all, only two seminal passages.’ Others 
have testicles, but they are inside, by the loin, near 
the place where the kidneys are ; from each of them 
runs a passage (as in those animals which have no 
testicles), and these two passages join up together 
(again like those other animals): among the class 
of animals which breathe air and have a lung, this 
occurs in all the Birds and in the oviparous quadru- 
peds, for all these as well have their testicles inside, 
by the loin, and two passages leading from them, just 
as the Serpents have: examples are the lizards, the 
tortoises, and all the animals with horny scales. All 

sex hormones from the interstitial cells of the testis and ovary 
respectively. 

* These are in fact the testes, but Aristotle reserves this 
name for the firm, oval-shaped testes. This negative state- 
_ ment does not of course include the cartilaginous fishes, the 
Selachia, many of which are viviparous. 

15 

ARISTOTLE. 

716 b 

mdvra. TO Be CwordKa mdvra pev ev TO eutrpoober 

€xet TOUS Opxets, adn’ Evia. avray gow Tpos TO 

Tee. THs yaoTpos, olov 6 deAdis, Kat od mopous 

aA’ aidoiov amo TOUTMV mepatvov eis TO fo, 

xabdmep ot Boes," Ta 8° &&w, Kal Toure 7a. pev 

30 amnpTynpevous, dorrep avOpwros, Ta de mpos Th 

edpa, Kabdaep ot des. Suchprorar dé rept adTav 

dicptBeorepov € ev Tais toroplaus tais mept TOV Cawv. 

At o borepat maou" peev eiou Suepeis, xabdaep 

Kal ot Opxets Tots dppeor dvo maow: ravras oy 

exovar TO pev Tpos Tots ap§po.s, Kabdarep at TE 

35 yuvatkes Kal mavra Ta CworoKobyra. Toe povov 

717 a Ovpale adda Kal ev avrois, Kal ot ixOves doou 

@otroKovow ‘eis Tovppaves, Ta Oe mpos TO. b7r0- 

lospart, Kabdmep ot 7 dpviles mavres Kal TOV 

ixOveov of Cworoxobyres. exovar be duKpdas kal 

Ta. padakdoTpaka Tas borépas Kal 7 paAdicua Ta, 

5 yap Kkadovpeva. Toure @a Tovs TEpLeXovTas 
bpevas doTepiKovs EXEL. 

MadAtora d€ adidpiotov emi TOv TroduTddbwyv eotiv, 
wote doxetvy piav elvat’ rovtov 8 aitwov 6 Tov 
cwpatos OyKos TavTH Gpotos wr. SiKpoat Sé Kal 

1 xabdmep ot Boes delet Platt, qui tauros credit significari, 

2 gaat PSYZ*: waca » Boer per errorem. 

* In front: that is, with reference to the ideal posture of 
an animal, viz., that of man. 

> The term aidoiov seems to be used inclusively by Aris- 
totle for any genital organs; often it means “ penis,” but 
obviously it cannot mean this here. Cf, H.A. 509 b 27-29. 

¢ For the 66s, one of the Selachia or cartilaginous fishes, 
ef. H.A. 540 b 17 ff., 566b 4, It is probably either Noti- 
danus griseus, which has very large eyes, or Cophatontera 
giorna (= Dicerobatis g.), the “ ox-ray. 

This reference to Bdes is excised from the text by Platt, who 

16 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. m1 

the Vivipara, however, have their testicles in front,* 
though some of them have them inside by the end of 
the abdomen—e.g., the dolphin—and have no pass- 
es, but a sexual duct® which leads from them to 
outside, as the ox-fish® have ; while some have 
the testicles outside, and of these some are pendent 
(as in man), others fastened by the fundament (as in 
swine). I have given.a more accurate account of 
these in the Researches upon Animals.¢ 
The uterus ° is always double without exception, 
just as in males there are always two testes without 
exception. In some animals the uterus is by the 
pudenda (as it is in women and in all animals that are 
Viviparous internally as well as externally, and such 
of the fishes as lay their eggs visibly); in other 
animals the uterus is up towards the diaphragm / (as 
it is in all birds and in the viviparous fishes). The 
Crustacea, too, and the Cephalopods have a double 
uterus, since the membranes which surround their 
“eggs 9 as they are called are uterine in nature. 

e uterus is particularly indistinct in the Octo- 
puses, so that it appears to be single.* The reason 
for this is that the whole bulk of the creature’s body 
is of similar consistency throughout. In the large 

aoe Boes here to be “oxen.” A.-W. translate “ wie die 
ere.” 

# See H.A. Bk. III, ch. 1. 

* It should be noted, once for all, that this term includes 
what are now known as oviducts. 

? Aristotle does not confine his use of this term to mam- 
mals, which alone have a diaphragm in the usual sense of 
that term, and hence it must be understood to refer also to 
the corresponding position in lower animals, as in the present 
passage; cf. also De respiratione 475 a 8, where the trdlwpa 
of wasps, crickets, etc., is mentioned. 

9 See H.A. Bk. V, ch. 18. » Cf. 158 a 8. 

17 

T17a 

ARISTOTLE?! 3 4a) 

at T&V evropusy etoly év rots peyebos ‘€xovow 
ev dé Tots eAXdrroow adndor di. Thy pexpdryra 
10 Tov odparos. 
Ta pev oby elpnyieva, dpa Tots Sous Toorov 
exel TOV TpoTrov" Loa 
IV Tlept de Ths ev Tots dippeot Stagopas TOV / onep- 
paruc@y opydvay, et Tes perrer Dewproew Tas 
airtas bu as clow, dvayicn AaBeiv mpOTov, Tivos 
15 evekev i) TOV Opxecv €oTt ovoraots. et oy) mav 2 
gvors 7 7) dua TO dvayKatov Trovet a dia. 70, BéArtov, 
Kav Tobro TO pepiov et) dia Toure Odrepov. ore 
per Toivuv ovK divayKatov mos Th yéeveow, ¢a- 
vepov' maou yap av dripye tois yerv@at, viv & 
ov of des Exovow dpyets of of tyOves* Gppevor 
20 yap «iat ovvdvaldpevor Kal tAnpers Exovtes Dopod 
TOUS mopous. NeizeTrar roivvy Bedriovds Twos 
xapw. €oTr d€ TOV pev mArciotwv Cobwv epyov 
oxedov oder dAXo ahiy o waTrep Tv duty ore pia 
Kat Kapmos. womep 8 €v Tots mept THY Tpopiyy 
Td. edbvevrepa. AaBporepa mpos TH éxBopiav THY 
25 rhs Tpopiis, ovr Kal Ta LN EXOVTA Opyets mopous 
d€ pLovov, 7 EXOVTO pev evtos 8 €xovta, mavTa 
TAXUTEPA TpOSs TIV evépyetav THV cuvdvacpav. a 
d¢ det owdpoveotepa elvat, domep eet ovK €d4u- 
evrept, kai evTat@’ edAucas exovew of TMOpou ™mpos 
TO ue AdBpov pnde Taxetav elvar TH emOupiay. 
30 of 5°’ dpyeis «lol mpds TodTO peunyavnevor’ TOD 

me 

@ The Final Cause. 

> See Introd. § 6. 

© Of. the reason given in Plato, Timaeus 73 a, for the coil- 
ing of the intestines. See also P.A. 675 a 19 ff., 675 b 23 ff. 

@ See below, 718 a 15. 

18 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. u1-1v. 

Insects too the uterus is double, whereas in the 
smaller ones it is indistinct on account of the small- 
ness of the creatures’ body. 

This describes the arrangement of those parts of 
animals which [ have mentioned. 
_ Returning to the subject of the difference of the IV 
seminal organs in various groups of male animals OE 
If we are to consider the causes to which this is due, #nimais : 
we must first of all understand the purpose for the #3" 
sake of which ? testes exist. If we agree that every- ™Je: 
thing which Nature does is done either because it is 
necessary or else because it is better,” we should expect 
to find that this part, like the rest, exists for one or 
the other of these two reasons. Now it is evident 
that it is not necessary for generation, otherwise 
all animals that generate would have it, whereas | 
actually neither Serpents nor Fishes have testes, and 
these do in fact generate, because they have been 
_ observed copulating, with their passages full of milt. 
The other reason then remains : testes exist for some 
purpose—because it is better that they should exist. 
Now the business of most animals may be summed up 
pretty much as that of plants is—viz., seed and fruit; 
and, just as (to take a parallel case) animals which 
have straight intestines are more violent in their 
desire for food,° so here also, animals which have no 
testes but passages only, or which have testes but not 
external ones, are all quicker with the business of 
_ copulation. Those, however, which have to be more 
sober (a) in the case of feeding, have not straight 
intestines, and (6) in the case of copulation, have 
passages which are twisted,’ so that their desire shall 
not be violent or speedy. This then is the object for 
which the testes have been contrived: they make 

19 

17a 

717 b 

35 

5 

10 

8 
15 

‘ARISTOTLE: O1V AAV) 

yap omeppatiKod \ TmEpitTwmparos oTracywrépav 
mower THY Kivnow, ev pev tots CwortdKors, ofov 
immous TE Kal Tots dAAows Tots TotovTois Kal. ev 
avOpwrrois, odlovres Thy émavadimAwow (dv Sé 
Tpd7rov exer avtyn, ek TaV toTopidv TV TEpt Ta 
oa: det Dewpetv): od8ev ydp eior rdpiov TAY mopwv 
of Opxels, dAAa mpdcKewrat, kabdmep Tas Aauds 
mpogamroucty at dpaivovoas Tots iorois- depaupov- 
pevwy yap adt@v dvacn@vras of mopot evtds, WoT 
od Svvavrar yevvay Ta exrepvdpeva, émel €t pay 
avedTrewro, edvvavTo av, Kal 70n Tadpds Tis pera 
Thy eKTOMAY evléws dyevoas em\ijpace bua 70 
pjmw Todvs Tdépous aveotrdcbar. Tots O° dpvict Kal 

a > , ~ A 
Tols MOTOKOLS THY TeTpaTrddwy SéxovTar THY OTEp- 

parveny’ mepitTwow, wore Apadyrépay elvar TH 
efodov! 7 7 Tots ixPdow. gpavepov 8 émt rdv ikea’ 
mepl yap Tas oxeltas moXd pethous,, loxovar’ Tovs 
Opxels, Kal doa ye T&v dpvéwy Kal? wpay pay 
dyxever, GTav 6 xpdvos obTos TrapéAOn, odTw jLLKpOdS 
” v \ > / A A \ 
€xovow worTe ayedov adijAovs elvar, wept Se-THV 
> , , , a \ Plies Fr 
oxelav ofddpa peydAous. Oarrov pev ody dxevovat 
Ta €vTOs €xovTa: Kal yap Ta e€KTOS ExXOVTA OU 
TpoTEepov TO oTrépua adinor mpiv avaomdoat Tods 
dpxets. 
” A 1 » A \ ‘ ‘ ‘ 
Eri 5€ 70 Cpyavov 7d ‘mpos Tov quvtoas ace Te 
bev Tepamroda exet” evdexXeT AL yap avrois exewy: 
tots 8 dpvuct Kal Tots dmoow obK evdéxeTat Sid TO 
1 SreFodov PZ. 2 gxovar PSY. 
20 

. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. r1v.-v. 

the movement of the seminal, residue more steady. 
(1) In the Vivipara, as for instance in horses and 
other such animals, and also in man, they do this by 
maintaining in position the doubling-back of the 
passages (for a description of this reference must be 
made to the Researches upon Animals),* since the 
testes are no integral part of the passages : they are 
merely attached thereto, just like the stone weights 
which women hang on their looms when they are 
weaving.’ When the testes are removed, the passages 
are drawn up within; this is why castrated animals 
cannot generate, whereas if the passages were not 
so drawn up they would be able todoso. A bull im- 
mediately after castration has been known to mount 
a cow and effect impregnation,” because the passages 
had not yet been drawn up. (2) In Birds and in the . 
oviparous quadrupeds the testes receive the seminal 
residue, so that its emission is slower than it is in the 
case of Fishes.’ This is clearly to be seen in Birds : 
their testes are much larger at the time of copula- 
tion. Those birds which copulate at one season only 
of the year have such tiny testes when this period is 
over that they are almost indistinguishable, whereas 
during the breeding season they are very big. So 
then the animals whose testes are internal accom- 
plish their copulation more quickly, since in fact those 
with external testes do not emit the semen until the 
testes have been drawn up. 

Another point. » The organ for copulation is present V 
in the quadrupeds because it is possible for them to 
have it, whereas it is not possible for birds and foot- 

* H.A. 510 a 20 ff., and 718 a 15 below. 
> Of. 187, b-26. © Cf. H.A. 510 b 3. 
¢ Which have no “ testes ” in Aristotle’s sense. 
© Cf. H.A. 509 b 35 ff. 
21 

ARISTOTLE (17) yap 
717 b ~ A \ , ¢ \ / g \ Y 
Tov pev Ta oKeAn bd peony elvar Ti yaorépa, 
ta 8° GAws aoKedR elvar, TH 8€ Tob aidotov diow 
HpTncba evrebbev Kat TH Oécev KetaOor evradba. 
510 Kat ev TH dpAla 7 ovvtacis yiverar TOV oKe- 
20 Adv: , \ ” at iwi le teak | 
@v' 70 TE yap Gpyavov veupMdes Kat 4 vous 
TOV aKked@v veupaions. dor’ Emel TOUT ovK ev 
déxerau € Exew, dvdyKn Kal Opxeus 7 Ha exew ore) 
evrad? exew" Tois yap €xovow oa béais 
apporépwv adbTav. iy 
"Ett 5€ Tots ye Tovs Opxets €xovow co 81d Tis 
KATES Gepprawvopevov Tod aidoiov _Tpoépxerat TO 
25 omépua auvabpo.cbev, add’ ody ws €Touov dv 
evOds Oyobow, womep Tots ixOvaw. 
_ Ildvra & eyes ta CwordKa tods dpyes ev TH 
, ” ” 2 \ es i a. \ ‘ rite. 
apoabev [7 €&w],” mAjv éxivov- obros dé mpos TH 
> , / \ \ > \ : p17, e 
dagut pLovos, dia. THY adrhy airiay BV Fvrep Kal ot 
opvilles, Taxydv yap avayKatov yiveoBar Tov ovv- 
\ Sith la* > \ g : Vay 4 yi! 
30 Svacpov abtav*: od yap wWomep ta adAda* TeTpa- 
700a emt Ta Tpav emBatver, GAA’ opHoi plyvyvrar 
dua Tas axavOas. . 
Av’ jv pev obv airiay Exovor Ta ExovTa Spyets, 
” \ ae oF \ \ » Bie 
eipnrat, Kal du’ Hv airiay Ta pev €€w Ta 8 evTds. 
3 avoraats SZ. 

2 aut 7) é£w secludenda (om. &), aut <} évrds> addenda 

(Platt). 
3 Sa . . . adrdy fortasse secludenda ; sed ef. 769 b 34 seqq. 
4 @Aa Z: om. vulg, 

@ But the goose has a penis, H.A. 509 b 30. 
* Cf. 718 a 5, 739 a 10. 

c Omit, or read ‘‘ either outside or inside.” 
4 Inside, of course. 

22 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. v. 

less animals. It is impossible for birds * because 
their legs are under the middle of the abdomen. It 
is impossible for the, other creatures because they 
have no legs at all, and that is the place where the 
penis is always suspended and that is the position for 
it. (This also is the reason why there is strain on the 
legs during sexual intercourse : both the organ itself 
and the legs are by their nature sinewy.) And so, 
since it is impossible for them to have this organ, they 
must of necessity have no testes either, or else not 
have them in that place, since in those animals which 
possess both penis and testes the situation of both is 
one and the same. 

Another point. As far as the animals with external 
testes are concerned, as the penis is set in movement 
and gets heated, the semen first collects itself to- 
gether, and then advances : it is not ready immedi- 
ately contact is established, as it is in fishes.” 

All the Vivipara have their testes in front, [or out- 
side,°] except the hedgehog. This is the only one 
that has them by the loin,? and the reason is the same 
as for the birds,’ since they must of necessity ac- 
complish their copulation quickly, for they do not 
mount on the back as the other quadrupeds do, but 
on account of their spines stand upright for inter- 
course. 

We have now said why those animals which have 
testes have them, and why some have them outside 

¢ This remark, if it remains in the text, obviously cannot 
refer to the only reason so far given for birds at 717 b 15-17 ; 
if taken as referring to the reason which immediately follows, 
this will roughly correspond to the statement in H.A. 539 b 34 
that some birds copulate quickly. But no doubt the reason 
Aristotle. has in mind is thé one mentioned below at 
719 b 11 ff., viz., that the skin is too hard. 

23 

717 b 

718 a 

VI 
35 

or 

10 

15 

ARISTOTLE 

doa be [7 Exel, Kabdarep etpnrau, did Te 70 D pny i) aAAd. 
TO dvayKatov povov ovK Exel TOUTO TO poptov, kal 
dua TO dvayKatov elvat Taxetav yiveoOat THY dxetav 
ToavTn eorly a) TOV iXQdov vats Kal 7] Tov 
pew. ot prev yap iyQves 6 dxedovor Tapamimrovres 
Kal dmohvovra ,Taxews. aorrep yap emt TOV ay- 
Opebrreny Kat TavTwY TOV TovoUTiy dvdyien KaTa- 
oxovras TO TvedLa mpotecBan Thy youn, TooTo 8 
eicetvois ovpBaiver pa) Sexopevors THY Addarrav, 
cial de evplapror TobTo pa mo.obvres, ovKour. det 
ev T@ ovvdvacu@ TO omépua méTTEW avTous, 
Borrep Ta mela Kal wordka, aN’ b7r0 Thy Gpav" 
To omépya TTETTELLLEVOV dOpdov Exovouw, WOTE [11 
ev TO Ouyydvew aA Acov TETTEW,” aaAAa mpoteoBa 
memreppevov. S10 dpxeis odK Exovow, GAN edbets 
Kal amAobds rods mépous, olov joucpov [optov Tots 
TETpaTToow dmdpyer Tept Tovs Opxets” THS yap 
emravadimAdcews Tob mopov TO ev €valpLov HEpos 
éorl TO 8° avatpov, 6 d€xeTat Kal dv ob 707 omépjia. 
ov Topevera, oof éray evrabia EAOn 7 yor", 
Taxeia Kal ToUToUs yiverat 7 dmdAvors. ois 
si TowodTos 6 TOpos mas éeaTlv olos emi TAY 
imo THY pav A. -W., ef. H.A. 509 b 20, 35: T™po THs wpas 

Salomon Platt: bao tis dpas vulg. 
2 nérrew A.-W., digestio X: moveiv vulg. 

@ See ch. 4, init. For necessity, see Introd. § 6. 

> This appears to be the meaning ; Michael Scot renders 
eiciunt sperma velociter: cf. the English phrase “ relieve 
themselves.” Also at 718 a 14. 

¢ Viz., all that breathe. 

4 This, according to Aristotle, corresponds to breathing ; 
it is their method of self-refrigeration: see De respiratione 
476 a1 ff. 

24 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. v.—v1. 

and others inside. And as for those which have no VI 
testes, they lack this part, as we have said, because 
such absence is not good, but necessary merely * ; 
and also because it is necessary that their copula- 
tion should be accomplished quickly. Fishes and 
serpents come under this class. Fishes copulate 
by placing themselves alongside each other and 
quickly ejaculate.” Just as men and all such animals ¢ 
in order to emit the semen must of necessity hold 
their breath, so fishes must refrain from taking in the 
seawater,’ and when they omit to do this they easily 
come to grief. On this account they are bound to 
ayoid concocting * the semen during the act of copula- 
tion (which is what the viviparous land-animals do) ; 
instead, they have their semen ready concocted and 
collected at the proper time, so that they do not con- 
coct it while in contact with each other, but emit it 
already concocted. For this reason they have no 
testes, but passages which are straight and simple. 
In the testes of quadrupeds there is a small portion 
of a similar character : L refer to the latter portion of 
that length of the passage which is doubled back.’ 
One portion of this length has blood in it and one has 
not, and by the time the fluid enters this latter por- 
tion and passes through it, it is already semen; so 
that when it arrives there, ejaculation quickly takes 
place? in these animals too. In Fishes the whole of 
the passage is of the same character as this latter 

* Cf. T17 b 25 above. 

* The vas deferens; cf. above 717 a 33; and H.A. 
510 a 23 ff. 

9 Cf. above, 718 a1; Scot’s Arabic original seems to 
have been extremely cautious and to have given both possible 
meanings of dzoAvois; for Scot has eius exitus est velox, et 
cum exit sperma separantur mas et femina. 

25 

ARISTOTLE ATA 
718 a 
av perry Kat tv Tovodtwv Cowr Kara TO sine 
) fiepos THs eravabinhdoews. 

VI Of be opets dxevovrar TepleAuTTopevor aN ois, 
ovK €xover 0° Opxets oud" aidotov, aomrep elpnra 
mporepor, aidotov fev OTL ovde oKedn, 0, Opxets dé Sia 

20 To pijKos, ada. mOpous, aomep ot ixOves: oud yap 
TO «€lvou adray TMpopapen TH dvow, «i ert emi- 
oraous eyiyvero Tept Tovs dpxets, exdyer dv 7 
you") dea Tv Bpadvrijra. Omep cvpPaiver Kat emi 

TOV peya TO atdotov € €xovreny: dyyoverepor yap <iov 

TOV perpraldvrey dua TO [1 yovuLov elvar TO 
25 oTrepHa TO ipuxpov, Ppiyeobar de 79 pepopevov Nav 
paxpay. bu” Vv pev ovv aitiay Ta Lev opxets *xet 

Ta 8 ovdK é€xer TOV Cawv, ctpyrat, 
‘[LLepemAeovrae 5° adAjAots ot Opes dua oe 
agviay THs TapamTeqews. puKp@ yap mpocap- 
pOTTOVTES jopttp Aiav peapot ovres ovK evdour- 
30 dppoorot eciow: eel odv ovK Exovor HOpua. ofs 
“Tepihixhovrat, avrt Ttovtwv® tH dypdTyTt XpOvra 
TOO owpaTos, TepieAtTToOpevot GAAHAoLs. 810 Kal 
doxotor Bpadvtcpov amodvecIar Tav ixOdwv, ov 
povov dia TO pAKos TOV Topwv aAAa Kal Sia THY 

mEepl TadTa oKevwpiay, | 
VIII 35 Tots d€ OnAcou Ta mept Tas doTépas amropHcetev 
av tis Ov Tpdmov exer: ToAAal yap drevavTidcets 
1 quae sequuntur non proprio loco posita videntur. 
2 zovrou PZ. 

* Which is the place where it would have to be: 717 b 17, 
18. 
» As the preceding sentence would normally mark the 

26 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. vi.—-vut. 

portion of it in man and other such animals (z.e., the 
latter portion of that length of it which is doubled 
back). 

Sean, copulate by twisting round each other, VII 
but they have no testes and not even a penis, as I said 
earlier : no penis, because they have no legs either,* 
and no testes because of their length—instead, they 
have passages just as fish do—since as their bodies 
are so very ag if there were to be yet further delay 
in the region of the testes, the semen would be cooled 
off owing to its slow rate of progress. This does in 
fact happen with men who have a large penis : they 
are less fertile than those who have a moderately 
large one, because the semen gets cooled off by 
being transported too great a distance, and cold 
semen is not generative. I have now stated why 
some animals have testes and others not. 

* (Serpents intertwine because they are not natur- 
ally fitted for placing themselves alongside each 
other ; their bodies are so long, and the part by 
which they unite is so small, that they find difficulty 
in achieving union ; and so, as they have no parts by 
which they can take hold of each other, they make 
use of the suppleness of their bodies instead, and 
twist around each other. On this account, they 
seem, too, to take longer to ejaculate than fish do, 
not only because of the length of the passages but 
also because of the intricacy of the manceuvre.} 

One may well be puzzled concerning the arrange- yIII 
ment of the uterus in the various female animals ; () sexual 

6 . rts in 
many instances of quite contrary arrangements female. 

conclusion of the chapter, the remarks which follow are 
probably a supplementary note, or an alternative version, 
incorporated in the text. 

27 

718 a 

718 b 

ARISTOTLE“)! 0 /.)) 490 
dmdpxovow adrois. ouUTe yap Ta CworoKodvra 
dpolis exer mdvra, aA’ avOpevtrot poev Kal Ta mela 
TavTAa KATW mpos Trois dpb pors, Ta, d€ aehaxn ¢ray" 
CworoKobvra ave mpos TO drolcpare, oUTEe Ta 
@oroKobvra, GW’ of prev iyOves KaTrw tert 
dvO perros KL 7a Cworoxobvra TOV TetpaTrddwr, 
ot 8 opvibles ava, Kal doa @oroKet TOV rerpa- 
7Odwy. ov pay as exovar Kal adra at dmevay- 
TLWOELS Kara. Adyov. Tp@Tov pev yap. TH do- 
ToKobyra @oroxel Svadepdvtws: Ta pev yap areAn 
TpoteTas Ta @d, olov ot iydves: ee. yap | em 
reAcirar Kal AapBdver abenow TA. TOV ixObun. 
atrvov 8 OTe moAbyova Tadra., ca Tour. épyov 

10 avrav. aomep Tov duTav- «i obv ev adtots éreAcot- 

ovpyour, dvayKaiov oriya tH wAHOer etvau: vov dé 
Tocabra loxovow dare Soxety <év)* @ov elvar tihv 
dorépav éxarépav ev ye Tots purpois ixOvdious- 
Tatra yap mohvyoveirard, corw, aorrep Kal ert 
TOV dMov Tov avdAoyov Tovrols EXOT mp 
gvow, Kal ev dutois Kal ev Coos: 7 yap Tob 

1 <¢7a> Peck, vel fortasse fwordKa <évTa>. MW (pou 
2 <év> Peck, unumovum Xd. év supplendum esse suapicen 
erant A.-W. (collato H.A. 510 b 24), Schneider. 

: 

¥ 

* Selachia: the cartilaginous fishes, including the Sharks. 
The “‘ fishing-frog ’’ is not viviparous (see 754 a 26, m.). |. 

® The observation of Aristotle that the eggs of many 
organisms swell during their development, though unap- 
preciated for many centuries, is the basis of the modern 
distinction between cleidoic and non-cleidoic eggs. The 
walls of a cleidoic egg are permeable only to matter in the 
gaseous state (¢.g., the hen’s egg). Most aquatic animals, 
however, lay non-cleidoic eggs, 1.¢., eggs which, though they 
have a sufficiency of organic material (such as proteins, fats, 

28 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. vit. 

oceur. To begin with, not all the Vivipara have the 
same arrangement. All that are land-animals, in- 
cluding human beings, have the uterus placed low 
down by the pudenda, whereas the viviparous 
Selachia * have it higher up by the diaphragm. And 
then again, the Ovipara show the same variations. 
Fishes have the uterus low down like human beings 
and the viviparous quadrupeds, whereas birds have 
it higher up, and so do the oviparous quadrupeds. 
Nevertheless, there is rhyme and reason even in these 
contradictory phenomena. First of all, the egg- 
laying animals have different ways of laying their 
eggs. (a) Some creatures’ eggs are imperfect when 
laid—e.g., those of fishes, which become perfected, 
2.€., grow, outside the creature which produces them.? 
The reason is that these animals are very prolific and 
this is their function,* as it is that of plants ; so that 
if they brought the eggs to a state of perfection 
inside their bodies, the eggs would of necessity be 
few in number, whereas in actual fact they produce 
so many that each uterus seems to be just one mass 
of egg, at any rate in the very small fishes, which are 
the most prolific of all. The same is true both of 
those plants and of those animals which are of a 
corresponding nature? in their own classes ; what — 

carbohydrates, etc.) to make each an embryo, are insuffi- 
iia supplied with water and inorganic materials; these 
they have to absorb from their environment. Hence their 
swelling. Though the main bulk of this is due to .water- 
intake, it is interesting that the greater part of the copper, 
for example, which is present in the respiratory ble 
pigment of the octopus at the time of hatching is derived, 
not from the egg as laid, but from the surrounding sea-water. 
See also 732 b 5, ete. 
= Cf. 117 4 22. 4 i.2., small. 

29 

718 b 

ARISTOTLE ‘\* AAD 

15 peyeBous avénous Tpémerau «is TO omeppa. Tovrots. 
ot 8 opvibles Kal Ta terpdmoda TOV WoToKwv 
TéAcia wa tikrovow, a det mpos TO odleoBat 
o)npddeppa elvat (padaxddepya yap ews av av 
Enow €xyn €or), To 8 CoTpaKov. yiverau b70 
Oepporntos efucpalovons TO dypov €K Tob yeddous. 

20 avayKatov obv Deppov elvau Tov TOmOY €v @ ToOTO 
avpPyoerar. tovwodros 8° 6 mepi TO idle’ Kal 
yap TV Tpopny meTTEL obros. ef otv Ta wa 
dvdyKen ev TH dorépa elvas, Kat TIHV dorépay dvdeyren 
mpos TO drolapart elvat tots renee Ta Wa Ti- 
KTovot, Tots 8 ateAq Katw° mpo 6808 yap ‘obrws 

25 €oTat. Kal TEpUKE d€ waAdAov 7 vorépa Kata elvae 
7) avo, Szov Ha Tt epmodiLen Er epov pyar Tis 
dvccws* KdtTw yap adris Kal TO mépas eotiv: Omov 
d€ TO mépas, Kai’ TO Epyov: avtn* 8 od TO Epyov. 

IX “Eyee d€ Kai ta CwortoKxodvra mpdos ddAnAa d1a- 
fopav. Ta pev yap od podvov' Bvpale CworoKet 

30 ada Kal ev adrois, ofoy dvO parrot Te Kat trot 
kal KUves Kal mdavra 7a tpixas ExovTa, Kal TOV 
evddpenv deAdives te kai Pddawar Kai Ta Tovadra 
K7}TN. 

X Ta Se oeddxn Kal ot €xets pale ev Levo- 
Tokobow, év avrois 5 woroKodc. mp@rov. wo- 
Tokova. de TéAcLov wdv- odTws yap yevvaraL eK 

1 «at Z: om. vulg. 2 airy PSYZ*: adr) vulg. 

* j,e., do not increase in size after being laid. 

» j.¢., Without first producing an egg internally. ‘Aristotle 
knew nothing of the existence of the mammalian egg, which 
is a single cell of microscopic size. 

30 

i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. vit.—x. 

would have produced increase of size is in them 
diverted to form seed. (6) Birds, however, and 
quadrupedal Ovipara lay eggs that are perfect,* and 
these eggs for safety’s sake are bound to have a hard 
skin (while they are still growing, they have a soft 
skin), and the shell is formed by heat, which evapor- 
ates the fluid from the earthy substance ; hence the 
place where this is to be done must of necessity be 
hot—a condition which is fulfilled by the region round 
the diaphragm, as the fact that it concocts the food 
' shows. So, if the eggs must of necessity be within 
the uterus, the uterus must of necessity be alongside 
the diaphragm in those animals whose eggs are in a 
perfected condition when laid, while it must be low 
down in those whose eggs are imperfect when laid 3, 
it will be advantageous so. Further, it is more 
natural that the uterus should be low down than 
high up. (unless there is some other business of 
Nature’s which prevents it), since its conclusion is 
down below too; and where the conclusion is, 
there also the function is ; thus the uterus is where 
the function is. 

Similarly, the Vivipara differ from one another. IX 
Some of them bring forth their young alive not 
externally only but also within themselves,’ as for 
instance, human beings, horses, dogs and all haired 
animals, also such water-animals as dolphins, whales 
and such cetacea.° 

Selachia and vipers, though they bring forth their X 
young alive externally, first of all produce eggs 
internally. And the egg they produce is a perfected 
one, for thus only is an animal generated from the 

* Cf. H.A. 566 b 2, where Aristotle explains this to mean 
_ those creatures which have no gills, but a blowhole. 

31 

ARISTOTLE 
718 b ; 

35 rod Wot 70 C@ov, €& aredods dé obbev. Odpale 5é 
ovK @otoKobor dia 7d yuxpa tiv ddaw etvar Kat 
XI obx ws Ttwés hac Oepud. padaxodepia yoov ra 

x A ~ \ \ A > /, s 
@a yevvOow: oud yap To elvaw oAvydeppa. od En- 
paiver adta@v  pdows TO EoyaTov. Oia pev odv 
719 a TO tbuypa «lvar padaxddeppa yevv@or, dua S€ TO 

padaxodepua od Ovpale- SiepBeipero yap av. 

“Orav d€ To* C@ov ex Tob wWod yiyvyTaL, Tov avToV 
Tpomov Ta mAcioTa ylyverat dvaep ev ToIS Opviaw" 
KataPaiver yap Katw,” Kal yiyverar C@a mpos Tots 
5 apOpas, kabdmep Kal év® Tois €€ apyfs <dOds Cwo- 
Tokovaw. 10 Kal THY boTépay Ta ToLatTa ExeL 
avouoiav Kat tots CwordKois Kat Tots @oTdKots, 
dua. TO dudorépwv peréxew TOV €ld@v' Kal yap 
mpos TH brolwpat. Eyovot Kal KdTwW TapyHKovoav 
mavrTa Ta ceAaywdyn. Set Sé Kal wept Tadrns Kal 
10 wept TOV GdAwY dorepdv, dv Tpdmov Exovow, ek 
Te TOV avatonav TeHewpynKévar Kal Tv toropidv. 
wote dia pev TO WotdKa elvar TeAclwy W@aV avw 
éxet, Sua 5€ TO Cworokeiv Kdtw, Kal appotépwr 

peretAndacw. 
Ta & et@ds CwotoKodvta mavta KadTw: od yap 
176 SY: om. vulg. 2 sed vid. p. 562. 

3 kat v ZL: &v Y: Kal vulg. 

* According to Aristotle, Empedocles had said that those 
animals which are hottest live in the water to counteract the 
excess of heat in their constitution (De respir. 477 b 1 ff.). 

» The Dissections, in seven Books, is no longer extant. 
Aristotle several times refers to the ‘diagrams in the Dis- 
sections ’’ and the like (e.g. 746 a 14), and it was no doubt a 
collection of material with anatomical diagrams prepared 
for use in the lecture-room. Jaeger (A7ristotle, Eng. trans., 
336), following V. Rose, describes it as an anatomical atlas. 
See also Jaeger, Diokles von Karystos, 165-167. 

32 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. x.-x1. 

: nothing is generated from an imperfect egg. 
The reason why they do not lay their eggs externally 
is because they are by nature cold creatures, not hot, 
as some persons allege.* Anyway, the eggs they XI 
produce are soft-skinned—because the creatures have 
so little heat in them that their natural constitution 
does not dry off the outermost part of the eggs. Thus 
the coldness of the creatures.is the reason why the 
eggs they produce are soft-skinned, and the fact that 
the eggs are soft-skinned is the reason they are not 
produced externally : if they were, they would come 
to grief. / 

When the animal is formed out of the egg, the 
_ process of formation is-for the most part the same 
as for birds: (the eggs) descend, and: the young 
_ animals are formed close by the pudenda, as occurs 
also in creatures which are viviparous right from the 
outset. Another result of this is that in animals such 
as we are now discussing the uterus differs both from 
that of the Vivipara and from that of the Ovipara, 
since they have a share in both these groups ;, that 
is to say, in all the Selachians the uterus is at the same 
time close by the diaphragm and also extends along 
downwards. (However, to ascertain the arrange- 
ment of the uterus of the Selachians and other kinds 
as well, the Dissections ® should be inspected and also 
the Researches°). Thus the Selachians: have, their 
uterus high up because they are oviparous and lay 
perfected eggs, while they have it low down because 
they are viviparous ; thus they have a share in both. 

Animals which are viviparous from the outset @ all 
have the uterus low down, since they have no natural 

¢ H.A. 510 b 5 ff. 
4 See above, 718 b 30. 

c 33 

ARISTOTLE 640) 

719 
; epi7rodiler Ths pucews ovdey epyov, odde ‘Surto- 

15 yovel. mpos S€ rovrows dddvaroy Ca yiyveoBar 
mpos Tots droldpacww: TQ pev yap euBpva. Badpos 
Exew dvaykatov kal Know, 0 dé TOTS. emrikaupos 
av 708 Cav odk av Sdvaito Tab0 dreveyKeiv. ert 
8’ avayxn dvotokiav eivas dua’ TO pehKos THs hopas,; 
emel Kal viv emi TOV yuvark@v, eav trept TOV TOKO 

20 advacmdcwot Xaopnodpevat 7 (Tl ToLwodTov mrouj- 
cagau, dvoTokotew. Kal Kevat 0° ovaau at borépat 
avw mpooroTdapevat miyovauw: Kal yap avayKy Tas 
peAAdovoas Cov e€ew iaxuporépas <ivas, 50 cap- 
KHdeis elolv at Tovadrar macar, al Sé mpds TO 
trolapari dpeve5dets. Kal én abrav bé Tav 

25 Suyoviay TOLOUPLEVODY Sow Pavepov | TobTO GUpL- 
Baivoy: Td pev yap. oa dvw Kal ev 7 mhayiey 
laxovar, 7a de oa. < €v T@ KATW pepe THs dorepas. 

Av iy pev odv airiay drevavtiws Exovat TA mept 
Tas dorépas eva TOV Cer, Kat 6Aws Sua ri Tots 
pev Kadtw Tots S€ avw mpds TA drrolapart elow, 
elpnTar. 

xl 30. Avdte S€ Tas bev borépas Exovat mdvra, évrés, 
Tovs © Opxeis Ta fev ExTOS TA 5’ EvTdS, aiTwov TOD 
pev Tas vorépas evrds elvas waow, dtu ev TavTals — 
€oTi TO ywopevov, 6 detrar PvdAakfs Kal oKémns® 
kal mépews, 6 8 éxrds roO adpatos Toms ebBAa- 

1 sie PZ: rots troljpacw vulg. y ial 

2 Kat oxémns om. PZX, A.-W. 

* They omit the internally oviparous stage. 
» See Introd. § 62, and n. 

34 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. x1.—-x1. | 

function that prevents this, nor do they produce their 
young »by the two-stage -process.*. Besides, it is 

Jeapostible for young animals to be formed near the 
diaphragm ; embryos are bound to be heavy and to 
move about, and that part of the body is.a vital spot 
and would not be able to put up with such things. 
Further, (if the uterus were placed high,) parturition 
would of necessity be difficult on account of the 
distance to be covered, since even as it is, in the case 
of women, if they draw up the uterus at the time of 
parturition by yawning or by doing something of the 
sort, difficulty in delivery is the result. Even when 
empty the uterus produces a stifling sensation if 
pushed upwards. Besides, a uterus which is destined 
to contain: (not an egg but) an actual animal must of 
necessity be a stronger thing ; thatis why the uterus 
of all viviparous animals is fleshy, whereas in those 
cases where it is near the diaphragm the uterus is 
membranous. . This is clearly to be seen in the case 
of those animals which produce their young by the 
two-stage process: the eggs are carried high up and 
_ towards one side, whereas the young creatures are 
carried in the lower part of the uterus. 
_ We have now explained the reason why contrary 
arrangements of the uterus are found in certain 
animals, and in general why in some the uterus is 
placed low down apa in others high up’ by the dia- 
phragm. 

We have seen too that while all animals have their Xi 
uterus inside, some have their testes inside and others © Gepet*! 
' outside. The reason why the uterus is always inside 
is that it is the container for the young creature while 
it is being formed, and this needs protection, shelter, 
| and concoction,? which the outer part of the body 

35 

719 a 
35 

719 b 
5 
; 10 

20 

ARISTOTLE | Aw 

mos Kal yvypds. of 8 dpyets Tots pev evTos ‘TOIs 
3 ExT ds" dua (Se) To detobau Kat Tovrous: onemns 
Kal Kadtuparos mpos TE owrnpiav Kal Tpos Thy 708 
omépparos Trey ( (addvarov yap éedvypevovs Kal 
memnyoras dvaomécBa Kal mpoteoBar THY youn) ; ? 
[Sudrrep |? Gaous ev pavep@ eioly of 6, Opxets, EXovar 
oKemay Sepparucny TH KkaAoupevny ooxeav* gous 
5° 4 700 S€épparos pvois évavtiobrar bia. oxAn- 
poTnra mpos TO py mrepudymrrucny elvar pnde jaa- 
Daxeryy Kal Sepparucny,® otov Tots T ” xOvades € Exover 
TO Sépya Kal Tots podburov, tovTais 8 dvayKatov 
evTos €xEwW. Sudrrep ou TE deAdives Kal 00a Trev 
KnTwWo@v dpxeis E€xXovow, €vTos ExXovot, Kal Ta 
@oToKa Kal tetpdmoda Tov dodiiwrdv. Kal TO 
Tt&v opvibwy dé dépua oKAnpov, wore Kara pey<los 
dovpyetpov elvar meptAaBeiv, Kal radrnv airiav 
elvat maou TovTois mpos Tats eipnucvas mpdorepov 
ex TOV Tepl Tas deltas ovpPawwovTwv avayKaiwr. 
bua THY abriy 5” airiav Kal 6 éredas Kal 0 exivos 
exovaw evTos Tous opxeus” odde yap Tovrous edves 
TO S€pya mpos TO xwpiaTov Exew 76 okeTAOTLKOY 
popLov. 

[Ketyrac d€ Kai TH Gece sal geiaes a dorépat 
Tots TE Cworoxobow € ev avrois Kal Tots @oroKodar 
Dvpale, Kal ToUTWwY TOis TE TAS borépas. Exovgr 
KdTW Kal Tois mpos TH Umolapatt, olov Tots 

1 éxros tots 8 evrds SZ. 
2 sic interpungunt A.-W., qui et <dé> addunt. 
p 8} q 
3 S.d7ep seclusi. 
4 unde. . . Sepwarixjv secludunt A.-W. 

* Not in the Generation of Animals ; but see 717 b 29. 
86 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I xu. 

cannot provide, being easily injured and cold. The 
testicles, however, are inside in some animals but 
outside in others: since, however, they also need 
shelter and covering to keep them safe and to secure 
concoction for the semen (for if they have been 
exposed to cold and rendered stiff they cannot be 
drawn up and emit the semen), those animals 
whose testes are in the open have a covering of skin 
over them known asthescrotum; while those animals 
the nature of whose skin is so hard that it is not 
amenable to this arrangement, and cannot be used 
for a wrapping and is not soft or like ordinary skin 
(e.g., animals whose skin is like that of fish, and those 
whose skin is made of horny scales)—they must of 
necessity have their testes inside.. On this account 
the dolphins and those cetacea which possess testes 
have them inside ; so do those horny-scaled animals 
which are oyiparous and four-footed. Birds, too, have 
hard skin, which will not accommodate itself to the 
size of the testes and make a wrapping for them, and 
this makes another reason why in all these cases the 
testes are inside in addition to the reasons (previously 
mentioned) due. to the necessary exigencies of 
copulation. And for this selfsame reason the testes 
are also inside in the elephant and in the hedgehog ; 
the skin of these two animals, as of the others, is not 
well adapted for having the protective part separate. 

*(Contrary positions of the uterus are found in those 
animals which are internally viviparous and in those 
which are externally oviparous ; and again in some 
of the latter class it is placed low down, in others by 
the diaphragm, as for instance in fishes on the one 

® The following paragraph is simply a hash-up of parts of 

__ the preceding chapters. 

37 

719 b 
25 
XIII 
30 
35 
720 a 

or 

. “| A TADARISTOSLE MITAAAARD 

ixOvou.mpds TE zovs dpvibas Kal Ta @oToKa TOV 
TeTpamrddav, Kal Tots Kat dpporépovs tods Tp6- 
Tous yerv@ow, €v éavrois pev" poroKodow, “els 
dé TO pavepov woroKodow. 70. bev yap Eyes 
ToKObVTA. Kat év abrots Kai €KTOS ETL ris “yaorpos 
Exel Tas: dotépas, olov dvOpwros wal “Bods Kal 
KUwV. Kal TaN TO. Tovabra: mpos yap Thy Tav 
eu Bpduv owrnpiav Kat avénow “ouppeper pnder 
emreivat Bdpos € ent Tats voTepats. fae 

“Eo d€ Kal Erepos oO TOpos bu 06 ih re Enpa 
Tepitrwors efépxerar Kal | be ob ue dypa Tovrous, 
maow. Oud € exovow aidota Ta Tovabra TdvTa. Kat ira 
appeva kai Ta O7jAca, Kal? a? exxpivera TO TEpiT- 
TWA TO Uypov Kal Tots Lev appeot TO: oTrépya, TOTS 
d€ OnAeou TO KUna.® obdtos 8 erdva Kal ev Tots 
mpooBiou dmdpxeu 6 Tépos (rob)* Tis Enpas Tpophs. 

5 [60a 8 wotoKkel pev drehes oe Dov, olov ooou Tov 

ixOvdav @orokobow, obra. 8° ony bad TH yaar i 
aAAG Tpdos TH dogve exovat TAS vorépas: ovre ‘yap 
eumrodiler a) Tob wood _avénats, dua TO ef Tehet- 
opobar Kal mpotevar TO avtavojevor. | O TE Topos 
6 autos cor [rat €v Tots A) EXOUTE YEevynTuKov 
aidoiov TO" Tijs Enpas tpodbijs, maau Tots @oToKoLs 
Kal Tots exovau avrav KvoTW, olov Tats xeAcvaus- 
THs yevéecews yap evekev, od THs Tod bypod TEpitT- 
TWpPATOS eKKpiaews, Elol SiTTol ot mopour Sua de 
To dypav ecivan thy dvow Tob oTEeppaTos Kal 7 THs: 
4 KEWTAL « 4 barépais secludit Platt, 
2 aEm: 6 vulg. 3 7a katapjva A.-W. 
* <¢rod> Aldus, A.-W. 

5 60a 8 .. . avfavopevov secludit Platt. : 
8 Kai sec]. A.-W. ? 7@Z: 6 vulg. 

38, 

’ 
: 
GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xi—xm. 

_hand as against birds and oviparous quadrupeds on 
the other; and then again it is different in those 
animals which produce their young by both of the two 
methods, viz., which are internally oviparous and out- 
wardly. viviparous. Those animals which are both 
roel pol and externally viviparous have their uterus 

the abdomen, as for instance man, ox, 
ae and | other such animals, since it is expedient for 
the safety and growth of the embryo that no weight 
should be put upon the uterus. ] 

In all these animals the passage through which the XIII 
solid residue issues is other than that through which 
the fluid issues. “ On this account all such animals, 
both male and female, have pudenda by which the 
fluid residue is voided, and thereby too in males the 
semen passes out and in the females the fetation.* 

e is situated higher up than the passage 
for the solid nourishment and in front of it. ° [Those 

animals which lay eggs, but lay imperfect ones, e.g., 
the oviparous fishes, have their uterus not under the 
abdomen but by the loin, since the growth of the egg 
causes no obstruction, because the growing object 
fom to its perfection and makes its advance outside 

e animal.} In all those animals which have no 
pudendum which serves for generation, this passage 
is the same as that for the solid nourishment, viz., 
in all the’ Ovipara, including those Ovipara which 
have a bladder, e.g., the tortoises. The existence of 
two passages, it must be remembered, is for the sake 
of generation, not for the sake of voiding the fluid 
residue, and it is only because the semen is fluid in 

® See Introd. § 56. 
® This sentence is a continuation of the previous inter- 
‘Polation. 
39 

720 a 

15 ovpBaivery, Tots pev Cwordicous dua Ta euBpva. é ev 

\ARISTOTEE orn, kv 

¢ i : ~ , ) : ~ ~ 
bypas tpodis mepittwois KexowedvyKe Tod adTod 

10 76pov. dijAov dé Tobro €x Tob omrepyia. pev Travra. 

pépew Ta C@a, wepitrwpa dé pay Taot isk 
bypov. fosne 

‘Evret obv Set Kal tods TtaV ape -mopovs 
Tods “omreppariKods epnpetoBae | Kal a) mAavacBai, 
kat Tots GjAeor Tas dorépas, Tobro 8 ava Kato tov 
q ™pos Ta mpdoobua TOO Gwpatos 7) m™pos Ta. Tpava 
Tots mpooBiors aut dorEpar, Tots 5° @oroKors, Tpos 
Th dogve Kal Tots Tpaveow: doa. 3” qo oxrjoavra 
év adrois wororel extos, TadTa 8. dpporépurs 
Exe dia TO pererAnpevar apport Epa kal. elvar, Kal 
CwordKa ka @ordoKa: Ta. bev yap dw Ths 

20 dorépas, Kal 4 ylyverat Ta a; bo TO brdlwpa 

mpos TH dopts €oti Kai Tois mpaveor, mpotodaa* dé 
KaTW ETL TH yaoTpl’ TavTn yap CwoToKE 7dn. 6 
d€ mopos eis Kal TovTos THs Te Enpas TEepiTTwoEWSs: 
Kal THs oxelas: obfev yap exet ToUTiy aidotov, 

25 Kabdzrep etpy Ta TpOoTEpov, darnprnpievov. _ Spotws 

oi exovar Kat ot Tav dppeverv Topo, Kal Tv exov- 
TwY Kal TOV BA eXOVT@V Opxets, Tats THY @oToKwy 
dorepais: Tact yap T™pos Tots Tpaveat mpoarrepv- 
Kao Kal KaTa TOV TOTOV TOV” THS paxews* Sel pev 
yap 7) mAavecbas GAN édpatous elvan, Towodros 5 

30 6 omobev TOTS" obros yap 7 70 ouvexes TapExe Kal 

THY ordow. Tots pev ody evT0s exovar TOUS Opxeus 
evdus € Epnpetapevot elow [apa Tots mopots |,* Kat Tots 

1 szpoiotca Platt, rpotovons vulg.: cf. 719 a7, HA. 51l a7 
seqq.: mpotovons d¢ <7a> xdtw Sus. 

2 sov Z: om. vulg. 

3 dua tois mopas secl. Platt. 

40 

i i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xi. 

nature that the residue from the fluid nourishment 
shares the use of the same passage. This is clear 
from the fact that although all animals produce 
semen, fluid residue is not formed in all of them. 
Now in males the seminal passages must have a 
fixed position and. not stray about, and the same is 
true of the uterus in females ; and this fixed position 
must of necessity be either towards the front or the 
back of the body. Hence, (a) in the Vivipara the 
uterus is in front, on account of the embryo; (5) in 
the Ovipara it is by the loin and at the back ; (c) in 
_ those animals which begin by producing eggs within 
themselves and later bring their young forth exter- 
nally, both positions are found combined, because 
the animals share the characteristics of both classes ; 
they are viviparous and oviparous alike; thus, the 
' upper portion of the uterus, in which the eggs are 
formed, is below the diaphragm by the loin, and 
towards the back; but its continuation is lower 
down, by the abdomen, for from this point. onwards 
the production of live young begins. In these 
animals also there is one passage only for the solid 
residue and for copulation; none of them has a 
pudendum projecting from the body, as has been 
said before. What is true of the uterus in Ovipara 
is true also of the passages in the males, both those 
which have testes and those which havenot. © In all 
of them the passages are fastened towards the back 
near the region. of the spine; fastened, because 
they may not stray about, but must have a settled 
position, which is just what the back part of the 
body provides; it gives continuity and stability. 
Indeed, in those animals which have their testes 
inside, the passages acquire their fixed position at 

41 

ARISTOTLE TANI AND 
720 a 
extos 8 opolus: clr dmavt@ow eis €v mpos TOV 
rob aidoiov TOTOV. Opois dé Kal Tois deAdiow 
ot TrOpoL exovow: aNd. TOUS Opxets €xovat KeKpvpl- 
35 jLevovs bro TO mepl Thy yaorepa KUTOS. 

Ids pev odv exovar TH Oécer Tept 7a. popia TO. 
720 b ovvrehodyra 7 pos THY yéveow, Kal bua Tivas. bikie 

elpnrar. 
XIV Téy 8 aAdwv Coe TOV dvatueov ody é ee 
TpoTos TMV popiey Tov T™pos Thy yeveow ouv- 
tehowvreoy oUTE Tots evaipLous ou8! éavrois. €ott be 
5 yevn TéTTApa TA Aourd,' € ev pev TO TOY pahaxoo- 
TpaKev, dedTEpov dé TO TOV poAaKiwy, TpiTov dé TO 
TOV EvTOUWV, Kal TéTApTOV TO TOV doTpaKodépmwr 
(rovtwr 5é mrepi ev mdvtwy adnAov; Ta Sé mActoTA 
ore ov" ovvdudlerae pavepov twa dé ovviorarat 
TpoTrov, dorepov AeKréov). 7a dé padaKdorpaka, 
10 ovvdvdlerar jeev aomep Ta Orvaboupyrird, dTav TO 
pev Unrov TO be mpaves eraddd En Ta ovpata* Tots 
yap tarious m™pos Ta mpavi emBatvew eprrodile: Ta 
ovpata paxpay €yovrTa Tv amdpTnow Tov mTE- 
pvylwy. €xouvor 5° of pev appeves AerrTovs wdpous 
Bopixovs, ai dé OnAcar torépas tuevwders mapa 
15 TO evtepov, evOev Kat evbev. €oxiapevas, ev als ey- 
XV ylverar TO ov. Ta dé padrdKua ovpmTAdKETaL prev 
KaTa TO oTdpa, avTepeidovTa Kat dtamrirrovra 
Tas mexravas, ovpméxerat be Tov Tpomov tobrov. 
e€ dvdyKens” a yap dvots mapa TO OTéma Tv TE= 
Acura Tod TEpiTTopwaros ouvijyaye Kdpapaoa, Kab- 
20 dep elpynras mpdotepov [ev Tols Tept ‘T@v popiwv 

1 ob yulg., 2: om. PY, Platt. ay tarel 

@ Snails are the exception (762 a 33). 
42 > 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xm.—xv. 

the very outset [at the same time as the passages]; 

and similarly in those animals whose testes. are ex- 
ternal. Afterwards they meet and unite .towards 
the region of the pudendum. The arrangement of 
the passages is the same as this in dolphins, although 
their testes are hidden below the abdominal cavity. 
_ We have now described the situation of the parts 
which are concerned with generation in the blooded 
animals and have stated the causes. 

“In the other class of animals, yiz., the bloodless XIV 
ones, the manner of the parts concerned with genera- (i) 7) 
tion is quite different from what it is in the blooded animals. 
ones; and what is more they differ among them- 
selves. We have here four groups still left to deal 
with: (1) Crustacea, (2) Cephalopods, (3) Insects, 

(4) Testacea (with regard to all of these the facts 

are obscure, but it is plain that most of them do 
not copulate*; as for the manner in which they 
arise, we must describe this later on).? (1) The (). Cres- 
Crustacea copulate as the retromingent animals do : “°* 
one lies prone and the other supine and they fit their 
tail-parts one tp the other. The males are prevented 
from mounting the females belly to back by their 
tail-parts which have long flaps attached to them. 
The males have narrow seminal passages, and the 
females have a membranous uterus by the side of the 
gut, divided on either side, and in this the egg is 
formed. (2) The Cephalopods copulate by thexy - 
mouth, pushing against each other and intertwining Sa 
their tentacles. This manner of copulation is due to Z 
necessity, because nature has bent the end of the 
residual passage so as to bring it round by the side of 
the mouth, as I have previously said [in the treatise 

® Book III, ch. 11, 
43 

720 b 

| ARISTOTLE OLY ANAM) 
Adyous|. A EXEL o° 4) Onjeva juev dorepiKov Héptov 

pavepas €v éxdoTw Tovtwr Tdv Caiwy* dov yap 
loxe TO pev Tp@Tov ddidptorov, Sreura Svaxpe- 
vdjLevov yiverat 7roAdd, Kat darorixrey Exaoroy 
TOUTWY areXes, Kabdrep Kat ot @oroxobyres TOV 
25 iXPvov. 6 bé. mpos 3 avres Tod TEpuTTeparos 
Kat Tob vaTepuKcod Hoptov eat Tots pL axoo7pdxous 

Kai ToUToLs" leo7i yap 7) Tov Bopay adinar Si Too 

mdpou: |* Toro" 8 éotw év tots darrtous TOU ow- 
paros, h TO Kédugos apéoTnKe Kad ui Odédarra 
eloepxer au. bud 6 avvdvagpos Kara TobTo yiverau 
30 TO dippeve mpos THY OnAevav: ‘ivayKatov yap, <lmep 
adinat wt 6 appyv etre omépya eiTe pdpiov etre 
aAAnv Twa. Sdvapuy, KaTa TOV’ borepucov Topov 

mAnoud Lew. 9 Se THs mAeKrdévns TOO appevos dia 

Tob adrod  Sieots emt TOV TtoduTddav, F paolv 
oxevew mhexrovy of aAets, oupmAoKijs Xap eaTiv, 
35, add” ody as dopydvou Xpnotyiov _Tpos Thy yeveow* 
ew ydp €ort To} mdépov Kat Tod odparos. 

1 om. PZ, secl. A.-W. ¢! 
2 76 Bekker per typothetae errorem. © ; 
3 seclusi. 4 rodro Peck, radra vulg, ad 
ze PZ: om, vulg. ctl 

* 684 a 15, 685 a 1. > Of. Tis.b,11. 

¢ Cf. P.A. 684 a 17 ff. 

@ See Introd. § 18. .‘* Part” does not necessarily’ itaphy 
a limb, and the fact. that it, is mentioned here: between! 
semen and dynamis suggests that “limb.”’ is not the: mean- 
ing here (cf. P.A. 648 a 2, where blood is described as a 
““part’’). All the same, Aristotle may here be intending to 
use *‘ part”? in the sense of limb, for in three genera of the 
Octopoda the hectocotylized arm, (see note below, on 1. 32) 
becomes detached from the male and remains within the 

44 

ee eee nani ieee — we 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xv. 

on The Parts of Animals).* The female of each of 
these animals has a part like a uterus, which is plain 
to be seen ; it contains an egg which at first is indis- 
tinet,? but later divides up and is formed into a num- 
ber of eggs, each of which the creature deposits in 
an imperfect state, just as the oviparous fishes do. 
In ‘these animals as well as in the Crustacea the 

issage which serves for the residue and connects 
with the uterus-like part, is one and. the same (it is 
on the under surface of the body, where the “ mantle” 
lies open and the sea water enters in®). Hence it is 
through this that the male effects copulation with the 
female, since if the male discharges anything, be it 
semen, or some part,? or some other substance,® he 
must of necessity unite with the female through the 
passage which leads to the uterus. In the case of 
the Octopuses, the male inserts his tentacle through 
the funnel of the female, and the fishermen allege 
that copulation is effected by means of this tentacle 
but its purpose is really to link the two creatures 
together; it has no instrumental use so far as 
generation is concerned, because it is outside the 

passage (of the male) and outside his body.’ 

mantle of the female. Aristotle however does not explicitly 
mention this detaching of the arm, 

* Dynamis ; see Introd. §§ 23 ff. 

* This refers to the remarkable phenomenon in_ the 
Dibranchiata of the ‘ hectocotylization ” of one of the arms 
of the male, by means of which copulation is effected, as is 
stated in H.A. 524 a 5 ff., 541b9, 544a8ff. Here, however, 
Aristotle denies that the arm is so used, and his argument is 
not unreasonable, for it is not yet known how the arm be- 
comes charged with the spermatophores. For details and 
diagrams see P. Pelseneer, Mollusca (tr. G. Bourne), 323 ff. 

9 i.2., not a part of the main bulk of the body and not 
directly connected with the seminal passage. 

45 

720 b 
721a 

XVI 

10 

_ their name is common and the logos. o 

ARISTOTLE (6011) 

’Eviote de owvdudlovrat Kal ent 70. Tmpavy Ta 
paddxea TOT Epov be yeveoews xdpw 7 ov aXny 
airiav, ovbev & Onral Tw. 

Tdv 8 evropey 7a prev ovvdvalerar, Kal 7 yé- 
veous avT@v €otiv ek Cow ouvwvdpwv, ake 
emi TOV evaipov, olov ai te axpides Kat ot Tér- 
5 Tuyes Kal Ta haddyyia Kat ot opines Kal ot pup 
pnkes, Ta de owvdudlerau pev Kal yevv@ow, obx 
opoyerh 8’ abvrots adda oKadnKas pedvov, ovde 
ylyvovrat ék Caw arr ék onjmojeveny dypav, Ta 
de Enpav, olov al TE pian Kal at putas Kal vas 
kavOapises: ta 8 ovr ek Lawyv yivovrau ovte 
ovvdudlovrar, Kabldzep epmiBes TE Kal KwVvwTES 
Kat moAAd tovatra yev7. Tov dé ovvdvaloueve 
ev tois mActotows Ta OyjAca peilw tev dppéeveiv 
€oriv. mopous dé Ta appeva Oopixods od daiverat 
exyovra. adhinor S€ ws emt TO mA€lorov Etmely Td 
appev eis TO OAAv oddev pdpiov, GAA 7d OAAV eis 
TO appev KdTwHev aGvw. TeDedpnrat Sé TodTO emt 
TOMAGY, [Kal wept Tod avaBaivey WoadTws,| Tod- 
vavtiov 5° én’ dXdiywv: wore dé yever Sichetr, ovmTw 
ovvediparar. oxedov dé TobTO Kal ET Tov @o- 
ToKwv ixQdwv TeV mAetoroy cori, Kal emi tdv 
TeTpamodwy Kal @oToKwy: Ta yap Oijrca peeihen 
TOV appévwv €ort Sud 76 ovppéepe® mpos Tov eRe 

2 ‘seclusi. 2 cupdepew PZ: undipas vulg. 

* See Categ. 1a 5 “ Things are called * ae * when 

the essence. cor- 
responding to the name, is the same.” For ‘Spavepor, see 
note on 726 b 24. A useful mnemonic is: ovra@vupov is same 

46 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xv.—xvr. 

_ Sometimes too Cephalopods copulate while: both 
creatures are lying prone, but it has not yet been 
observed whether this is done for the purpose. of 
generation or for some other cause. 
(8) As regards Insects, some of them copulate, and XVI 
in those cases the young are generated from animals © ™s***- 
which are of the same name ® and nature as them- 
selves, just as happens in the blooded creatures ; 
instances of this are locusts, cicadas, spiders, wasps, 
ants. Others, although they copulate and generate, 
. generate not creatures of the same kind as them- 
selves but only larvae ®; and these insects moreover 
are not produced out of animals at all but out of 
putrefying fluids (in some cases, solids) ; instances. of 
this are fleas, flies, cantharides. Others neither are — 
produced out of animals nor do they copulate ; such 
are gnats, mosquitoes © and many similar kinds of 
insects. In most of the sorts which copulate the 
females are larger than the males ; and the males do 
not seem to have any seminal passages. Speaking 
generally, the male does not insert any part into the 
female ; but the female does so into the male up- 
wards from below: this has been observed in many 
instances, [and similarly as concerris mounting,] the 
opposite in a few; but we have not yet enough 
observations to enable us to classify them distinctly. 
We find that the females are larger than the males 
not only in Insects but also in most of the oviparous 
fishes, and likewise in those quadrupeds which are 
oviparous ; the reason being that the size is an advan- 
tage to them when a great bulk is produced inside 

in name and same in nature ; dyevupor is same in name but 
not in nature. > See Introd. § 77. 
* It is not possible to say exactly what insects are meant. 

47 

; ARISTOTLE | — 

721 a fe Lar) poe eee oe Se F 

pevov attois io THV @aV GyKoV.ev TH KUACEL. 
tots dé OnjAcow avTaV TO Tabs dorepaus dvdAoyov 
Hoptov OX WEVOV eoTt Tapa TO évrepov, domep 
Kat Tots: aMous, ev @ eyylyverat Td. kujjpara. 
dfjAov dé Tobiro emi te TOV aKkpidwy, Kal doa pe 

25 yeGos avTa@v EXEL, owvdudleobar meduxdrony” Ta. 
yap mAciora pupa Alay TOV evTdpuwv eoriv. — 

Ta pev odv rept tiv yéveow opyava trois Cwous, 
mrepl av ovK eAexOn mporepov, TodTov exeu TOV 
TpOmrov- Tov 3S ouovopLepa@y dareheipOn mrept Yyovis 
Kal ydraxros, mrepl @v Katpds €orww etme iv, mepl 

30 ev yovijs 77, mept dé ydAaKTos ev Tots Exopevors. 
xvull Ta pev yap mpoterau pavepas oméppa" TOY 
Cwwv, olov doa atrav evaya tiv dvow €ori, Ta 
8 evropa Kat Ta paddkia toTépws, adyrov. wore 
tobro Jewpyréov, méTEpov TavTa mMpoleTar oTéppa. 
Ta Gppeva 7) o8 mdvTa, Kal et pt) mdvTa, dia tiv” 
35 aitiav Ta pev Ta 8 ov Kal Ta OnjAea dé mOTEpov 
721 b ovpBadreras oTépua Te 7 ov, Kal €l [1 OTEpya, 
mOrepoy ove aXXo over, i) ovppaderar pe Tt, 
od omeppa O€. ett dé Kal Ta Tpoldueva omeppa Ti 
ouppdArerat Sia Tod omépyatos mpos THY yeveow 
oKETTEOV, Kal OAws Tis €oTw 7) TOO omépparos puous 
5 Kal yi Trav KaAoupevay Karapnviov, éoa TavTnv 

tiv bypoTnTa mpolerar TOY Edu. 
Aoket 5€ mavrayiveobar €k aomépatos, TO be 

1 onéppa om. SY*. 

@ It will be noticed that Aristotle omits to describe the 
Testacea, which would naturally follow at this point. The 

48 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi.—xvu. 

them by the eggs at the time of breeding. In the 
females the part that answers to the uterus is divided 
and extends alongside the gut, as in other animals ; 
this is where the fetations are formed. This can be 
clearly seen in locusts and in any insect whose nature 
it is to copulate, provided it is large enough ; most 
insects however are too small.* 

Such is the manner of animals’ instrumental paris 
connected with generation, which I had not dealt 
with in my previous treatise.’ Of the “‘ uniform.”’ ¢ 
parts, semen.and milk were there left undescribed, 
and the time has now come to speak of these. We 
will deal with semen without delay, and with milk 
in the chapters which are to follow.? 

Some animals discharge semen plainly, for instance XVII 
those which are by nature blooded animals; but it 5°™* 
is not clear in which way Insects and Cephalopods 
do so. Here then is a point we must consider : Do 
all male animals discharge semen, or not all of them ? 
and if not all, why is it that some do and some do 
not ? and further, Do females contribute any semen, 
or not? and if they contribute no semen, is there no 
other substance at all which they contribute, or is 
there something else which is not semen? And 
there is a further question which we must consider : 
What is it which those animals that discharge semen 
contribute towards generation, by means of it? and 
generally, what is the nature of semen, and (in the 
case of those animals which discharge this fluid) what 
is the nature of the menstrual discharge ? 

Tt is generally held that all things are formed and Theory. 

reason is that, according to him, they do not copulate: see 
731 b 8 ff. > De partibus. 
* See Introd. § 19. @ Book LV, ch. 8. 

49 

: ARISTOTLE “O11 AHIM AO 
721 b Ray Valea : ee = 
onéppa ek TeV yervevrey. 00 tod adtod Adyou 
€ori, 7OTEpoy Kal TO OAAD Kal TO dppev mpotevras* 
dupo 7 7) Odrepov Lovoy, Kat TOT Epov amo mavros 
10 dmépxeTat Tob odparos. 7 ovK amo mravros: ev- 
Aoyor yap, el p47) G70 TAVTOS, Hd” Gat * dpporépwr 
TOV YEVVOVTWDV. Sidmep, € emuaKemTEOV, emreud7) pact 
5 \ ‘ 
TWES ATO TAVTOS ATrLévaL TOD. CaaTos, aepl TOVTOV 
TOS EXEL mparrov. €or. 0€ oxedov, ois av Tis xpm- 
Gato TeKpnptors ws ag’ Exdorov TAV pope 
15 amidvtos Tob _omeppiaros,” TETTApA, THPATOV pev 
agpodporns Ths ndovys: paddov yap. 78d m)éov 
TAUTO yewopevov 7dBos, m€éov 8€ 70 maou Tos 
Hopious } TO. €vi } dAtyos ovpPatvov abray. er 
To €k KoAoBdv KodoBa yivecbar- dia pev yap TO 
Tob popiov evdees elvar od Badilew oméppa ev- 
20 red0ev dacw; dev 8? av a eAOn, TOOTO ovpPaivew 
pay yivectau. mpos d€ Tovrots ai Opovornres: pos 
Tovs yevyjgavras: yivovrat yap couxdres, OoTrep® 
Kat OAov 70 oda, Kal pdpia peopiows* ciep obv 
Kal T@ Grey" aiTvov THs. OpoudryTos TO age Sov 
eAbciv To. oTeppa, Kal Tots popiors altuov av ein TO 

a mpotevrat PSZ*: zpotera vulg, 
2 ds. . . onépparos om. PZ. 
* darep om. P, hisihrre: 
4 7G dAw Z: 708, dAov vulg. ; or 

juyk 

4 This is a view which is found in the remarkable Hippo- 
cratic treatise 7. yovfjs xrA..3 and 8 (vii. 474 and 480 Littré), 
and seems also to have been held by Democritus (see Diels, 

forsokr.’ 68 A 141 and 68. B 32). It closely resembles 
the hypothesis (“ pangenesis *) which was put forward by 
Darwin, that every unit of an organism contributes its share 
to the germ of the future offspring ; in other words, that the 

50 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, 1. xvn. 

come to be out of semen, and semen comes from 
the parents. *And so one and the same inquiry will 
include the two questions : (1) Do both the male and 
the female discharge semen, or only one of them? 
and (2) Is the semen drawn from the whole of the 
parent's body? or not ?—since it is reasonable to hold 
that if it is not drawn from the whole of the body it 
is not drawn from both the parents either.? There 
are some who assert that the semen is drawn from 

of ‘* pan- 
genesis” 
examined. 

the whole of the body, and so we must consider the © 

facts about this first of all. There are really four 
lines of argument which may be used to prove that 
the semen is drawn from each of the parts of the body. 
The first is, the intensity of the pleasure involved ; 
it is argued that any emotion, when its scope is 
widened, is more pleasant thanthe same emotion 

When its scope is less wide ; and obviously an emotion _ 
which affects all the parts of the body has a wider ~ 

seope than one which affects a single part of a few 
parts only, The sécond argument is that mutilated 
parents produce mutilated offspring, and it is alleged 
that because the parent is deficient in some one part 
ho semen comes from that part, and that the part 
from which no semen comes does not get formed in 
the offspring. The third argument is the resem- 
blances shown by the young to their parents: the 
offspring which are produced are like their parents 
not only in respect of their body as a’ whole, but part 
for part too; hence, if the reason for the resemblance 
of the whole is that the semen is drawn from the 
carriers of heredity move centripetally from all the parts of 
the body to the germ, thus involving the inheritance of ac- 
uired characteristics (for which inheritance, however, there 
is no evidence).—See also Hippocrates, wept dépwv sdarwv 

Tomwv 16. > Cf. 724 a 9-10. 
51 

r ARISTOTLERD | TAS MNO 

721 b 
ad’ éxdotov tt TOV popiwv €dOeiv. ere Sé Kai 

25 eiAoyov av evar ddoferev, ORE Kat rot ddov eer 
Tt 3 ob vives POT, otrw Kat Tov Hopiony 
eKAORD Ud aor €t exeivov onépya, Kat TOV pope 
éxdorov ein av Tt siden op idvov. mBava dé Kal Ta 
To.adra paptupia tavrais Tats Bdgais: od yap 
Moyov 7a avpduTa. TPOMEOHERT yivovras Tois ‘yo- 
30 vebow ot mraides, aAAa Kal 7a emikrnTa: odAds Te 
yap ats gi Tov er iforeey: non TwWes if ous ev 
Tots avtots Témois THY ek ova Tov TUToOv 7A 
ovis, Kal eTeyHe ExovTOS ev 7a Bpaxiove Too 
matpos emeonunvey ev Xadxnddu Ta Téxvw avy 
bic ea pverat Kal ob ha ed gin cio TO ypdppya. 
35 ore HEY obv amo TavTos EPKE TO TO OTTEp[La, oxedov 

722 a ex ToUTWY ep MLOTEVOUGL TWES. ‘ fa 
XVIIIl  @Maiverar 8 e€eralovor Tov igs pvr: fe 
padrov: td Te yap eipnueva Adew od xaderdv, Kal 
mpos TovTos dAAa ovpBaiver Aéyew addvara. mp@- 
Tov pev odv ote ovfev onpeiov 7 opovdtns Tod 
5 dmuévar ao TavTés, 6Tt Kat Pwryny Kal ovuyas Kal 
Tpixas Spoor ylyvovrat Kat TH Know, ad dv 
obbev dmépyerar. ea 8 odk exovel mw Stray yer- 
v@ow, olov tpiywow moddy 7 yeveiov. ere Tots 
dvwbev yovedow €oikacw, ad’ dv ovev anfdOer- 

: 

. 
@ It will be seen that this translation, in spite of its sound 
of modernity, is a close representation of the original. 

52 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvu.—xvut1. 

whole; theh the reason for the resemblance of the 
parts is surely that something is drawn from each of 
the parts. Fourthly, it would seem reasonable to 
hold that just as there is some original thing out of 
which the whole creature is formed,.so also it is with 
each of the parts; and hence if there is a semen which 
gives rise to the whole, there must be a special semen 
which gives rise to each of the parts. And ‘these 
opinions derive plausibility from such evidence as the 
following : Children are born which resemble their 
parents in respect not only of congenital character- 
istics but also of acquired ones * ;. for instance, there 
have been casés of children which have-had:the out- 
line of a scar in the same places where their parents 
had sears, and there was a case at Chalcedon of a 
man who was branded on his arm, and the same letter, 
though somewhat confused and indistinct, appeared 
marked on his child. These are the main pieces of 
evidence which give some people ground for believing 
that the semen is drawn from the whole of the body. 
» Upon examination of the subject, however, the XVIII 
opposite seems more likely to be true; indeed, it is 
not difficult to refute these arguments, and besides 
that, they involve making further assertions which 
are impossible. First of all, then, resemblance is no 
proof that the semen is drawn from the whole of the 
body, because children resemble their parents in 
voice; nails, and hair and even in the way they move; | 
but nothing whatever is drawn from these things; 
and there are some characteristics which a parent 
does not yet possess at the time when the child is 
generated, such as grey hair or beard. _ Further, 
children rgsemble their remoter ancestors, from whom 
nothing has been drawn for the semen. Resemblances 

53 

ARISTOTLE | (LaMiaie) 

722 a P :* a ' ; 
amrodidacr yap dud. ToAAGY yevedv ai dpotdrytes, 

10 ofov Kat ev “HAids 4 7G AlBiome ovyyevopéevy od 
yap % Ouvydryp éyévero, GAN 6 é« tadryns Aiioy. 
Kal emt Tov yigesees dé 6 adros Adyos* anes yap ore 
Kal tovTols amo mdvTwy av TOV peer TO" arrephia 
ylyvoito. moAAa d€ ra pev ovK Exel, Ta 8é Kat 

(  adédor tis av, ta dé mpoodvera. ert odd’ azo 

15 TOV hs nin fe pili bio kairo. Kal TabTa yl 

VeTaL THY ATI FXOW ES Hopdiy. rth eaito 

"Ere peo amo Tov sap ge nae a am 
épxetar ad’ éxdorov, olov amd capkos Kal daTod 
Kal vevpov, 7) Kal amo T@v dvopovopepav, otov 
Tpoowmov. Kal yeipds; et pev yap am exeivav 

29 fovov, CeouKkevar ede ekeiva povov:> éeoikact Be 

paArov tadra Tots yovetor {Ta dvopovojeph |,” 
olov mpoowrov | Kal xetpas Kal 7odas" lar oov 
pnde tabra 7G amd mavros azeNbeiv, ri kwAdver 
pnd’ éxeiva TH ad mavtos ameADeiv 6 SHO eclvat, 
aAAa dt? adAAnv airiav; «i 5’ dao 7@v avopo.o- 
pep@v povov, ovK apa amd TavTwr. MpoorKer 
25 5¢ paddov dm’ exelvwv: mpdtepa yap ékeiva, Kal 
ovyKELTOL TA avomovopeph e€ €xeivwv, Kal womTep 
mpdcwmov Kat xeipas ylyvovras eouxdres, obtw Kal 

1 <éoixevau edeu éexeiva povov"> Peck 5 monuerant A: -W.> 

intellegi debere, e.g., det exeiva jrdvov €orxévar. 
2 ra avopo.opeph secludenda, nam radra hoc significats 

5%, 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

of ‘this. sort recur after many generations, asthe 
following instance shows, There was at Elisa woman 
who had intercourse with a blackamoor; her daughter 
was not a black, but ‘that daughter’s’ son was. And 

the same argument will hold for plants. . We should «° 

have to say that the seed was drawn from the whole 
of the plant, just as in animals. But many plants 
= certain’ parts you can‘if you wish pull some’ of 
Ws Paste arts off, and some parts grow on afterwards. 
er, nothing is drawn from the pericarp to con- 
Ebhie to the seed, yet péricarp is formed in the 
new plant and it has the same fashion: as chant in 
the old one., 

Here is a further question. Is ‘the semen drawn 
énly frond each’ of the “ uniform ” parts of the body, 
such as flesh, bone; sinew, or is it drawn from-the 
“non-uniform ” parts as well, such as face and hand ? 
Consider the possibilities : (1) The semen may be 
drawn from the uniform *parts only. If’so, (then 
children. ought to resemble their parents in respect 
of these only,) but the resemblance occurs rather 
in the non-uniform parts such as face, hands: and 
feet. Therefore if even these resemblances in the 
non-uniform parts are not due to the semen being 
drawn from the whole body, why must the resem- 
blances in the uniform parts be due to that and not 
to'some other cause? (2) The.semen may be drawn 
from the non-uniform parts only: This means that 
it is not drawn from all the parts. Yet it is more in 
keeping that it should be drawn from the uniform 
parts, because they are prior to the non-uniform, 
and the non-imiform are constructed out of them ;. 
and just as children are born resembling their parents 
in face and hands, so they resemble them in flésh and 

55 

ARISTOTLE WAAR AS 
722 a 

La Vy @ > > FD, > 7, t < 
capkas Kal ovyyas. €t 8 am’ audotépwr, tis 6 
/ ps. ” ~ / : 
TpoTros av €ln Tis yevécews; ovyKerTar yap ek 
~ c ~ a 3 
TOY OL“oLlomEep@v TA avopLoLoLEepH, WOTE TO GTO 
30 ToUTwWY amevaL TO am eKxeivwy av ein amévar Kal 
Tis ovvlécews: wWorep Kav Ei amd TOD yeypap- 
/ ‘ ‘ 
fL€vov Gvopmatos amper TL,' EL ev amd. TaVTOS, KAY 
amo Tav avAAaBdv éxdorns, ei 8 aro ToUTwY, amd 
~ / a ; ns ie 
TOV OTOLXElwY Kal THs ovvOecews. WoT EimEp eK 
Tupos Kal TMV ToLwovTwY odpKeEs Kal daTa avveoTa= 
> A ~ U 5) ww 4 2 > \ \ 
35 Olv, ATO TWVY OTOLYELWY av ElN fLOVOY’* amo yap 
722b = rs avvOécews Tas evdexeTar;, GAAG pV dvev ye 
uA > ba) wv Ld , > ww 
tavTns odK av ein opowa. radrnv 8 et ru Sype- 
oupyet vaTEepov, TobT av Ein TO THs dpororyTos 
” > > > ‘ > ~ > A la \ ) 
aitiov, add’ od ro ameAOciv amo mavTds. 
"Rh 92 6N § , A 2 +3 a (gay 
TL et ev SteoTacpEeva Ta MEepyn ev TH oTreppate, 

. 1 ange te P, dain 7 Z: om. vulg. : 
2 povov Z: paArov vulg. 

* The point of the argument is this. There is no addi- 
tional material in the non-uniform parts beyond what there 
was in the uniform ones; the only additional factor is the 
assemblage (composition, combination, arrangement) of the 
uniform parts so as to make the non-uniform ones (¢.g., of 
flesh, bone, blood, sinew, etc.,.so as to make a face or an 
arm).. And as the assemblage, the fact that the uniform 
parts are arranged in a particular manner, is not a material 
thing, obviously nothing can be drawn from it as an ingredient 
for the semen. The argument can be carried a stage further 
still, as Aristotle points out, for the uniform parts themselves 
are merely assemblages of the elementary forms of matter, 
Earth, Air, Fire, Water. (See Introd. § 24, and 715 a 10 ff.) 

56 - 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

nails. . (3) The semen may be drawn from both uni- 
form and non-uniform parts. The question then 
arises : What can be the manner in which generation 
takes place ? The non-uniform parts are constructed 
out of uniform ones assembled together ; so that 
being drawn from the non-uniform parts would come 
to the same thing as being drawn from the uniform 
parts plus the assemblage of them.* (It is just like 
the case of a word written down on paper: if there 
were anything drawn from the whole of the word, it 
would be drawn from each of the syllables also,’ and 
this of course means that it would be drawn from the 
. letters plus the assemblage of them together.) Now 
flesh and bones, we should agree, are constructed out 
of fire and the like substances ©; which means that 
the semen would be drawn from the elements only, 
because how can it possibly be drawn from the 
assemblage of them? And yet without this assem- 
blage the parts would not have the resemblance ; so 
if there is something which sets to work later on to 
bring this assemblage about, then surely this some- 
thing, and not, the drawing of the semen from the 
whole of the body, will be the cause of the 
resemblance. 

Further, if the parts of the body are scattered about 

Hence, the theory boils down to an assertion that the semen 
is drawn from the simplest forms of matter, and as this 
excludes any distinctive characteristics, the theory loses all 
meaning. 

® Contrast the interesting theory examined in Plato, Theae- 
tetus 201 p ff., that ‘elements ” (crovyeta), whether physical 
elements or “letters”? of the alphabet, are“ ddoya * and 
cannot be known, until they are assembled into a “ syllable,” 
_ which is an entity over and above its components, and “* has 

-a Noyos,”’ and so can be known.—See also 715 a 12, n. 

* The “ elements” ; see Introd. § 24. 

57 

ARISTOTLE (11/14 45 
722 b Se. Hie 2 Qh Pe Penns eek , Nas Ns 
5 TOs CH; et be DENT) rang Gietyp phere Kal TH 
TOV aidoiwy MOS 5 od ‘yap ‘Opovov TO daridv amo 
Too GPPSHOS Kal Tod GrjAcos.. at oy pled cata 
"Eu €é: erdarepdes Spots amo mdvTwv dm 
épyerat, do yiyverar CaHa- aah i yap dmavra 
eer. 80 Kat ’EpmedonAns eoucev, ctrep ore 
Aexréov, pddvora A€yew dpoloyovpeva Toure 7 
10 Adyw [7d ye Tooobrov, GAN wna érépa 7, 0d 
Karas |": got Yap ev TO pope Kal TO Ai iid 
avpBorov. évetvar, dAov 8 aa’ pon crsth g dmvévat, 

GAAd di€oractat pedcwv pois, 1 pev ey ‘dv- 

SPs. <1 , 
A / \ \ / > ~ 2 e ~ ow > \ 
dua Ti yap Ta Oyrea od yea &€ abtav, etrEp aro 
, 2s iy 25 The pea) > 
mavros ‘Te, airepxerat, Kal, exer DHOoO PS GAA 
15 Ws €ovkev 7) OK ATAAXSTRM amo. TavTos, 7 ouTws 
womep exeivos A€yet, od TabTa adh’ Exarepov, 510 
Kat déovrar THs aAdjAwY ovvovolas. adAa Kat 
a> 997 ¢ \ \ , vo» 397) 
TOUT advvaTov. WoTep yap Kal weydAa ovr? adv- 

” 

vatov deoTacpeva owleoba Kal. euvya elvas, 

1. seclusi. y neh 

4 

* j.¢., which generative organs is the offspring to have~ 

male or female ones ? 
» Se., in this respect, though it may be identical in respett 

of hand, nose, eyes, ete. 
ais Nature” seems to mean here, as often, “‘ natant 

substance,” or ‘‘ substance.”’ 
4 BE mped. fr. 63 (Diels,, Vorsokr.*) ; it probably continued, 

; 

| 

e.g., ** Seed, and the other portion is in woman’s,” : 
58 u 
; 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

_ within the semen, how do they live ? If on the other 
hand they are connected with each other, then surely 
_ they would be a tiny animal. And what about the 
generative organs ?® because that which comes from 
the male ‘will be different from that which comes 
from the female.? 
_ Further, if the semen is drawn from all the parts 
of both parents alike, we shall have two animals 
_ formed, for the semen will contain all the parts of 
each of them. If this sort of view is to be adopted, 
the statement most closely in accord with it ap- 
_ pears to be that of Empedocles [at any rate up to 
a point; if we take any other view, he appears 
wrong]. Empedocles says that in the male and 
in the female there is as it might be a tally—a 
half of something—and that the whole is not drawn 
from either of the parents. “ But’ (I quote his 
words) 

torn asunder stands 
The substance ° of the limbs; part is in man’s. . .7 

Otherwise the question arises, why is it that female 
animals do not generate out of themselves, if so be 
that the semen is drawn from the whole body and a 
receptacle for it is at hand?» No; so far as we can 
see, either the semen is not drawn from the whole 
body, or if it is, it happens in the way described by 
Empedocles—the two parents do not both supply the 
same portions, and that is why they need intercourse 
with each other. But even Empedocles’ explana- 
tion is impossible. The parts cannot remain sound 
and living if “torn asunder’”’ from each other when 
small, any more than they can. when they are fully 
grown. Empedocles, however, implies that they 

59 . 

| AWRISTOTLE 017 24a 

722 b 
kaOdtrep "EpmedonNis, yen’ em ris: ‘pirdsryros; 

20 Aéywy : 
7 moAAat pev Kopoa. avattyeves a danpadie, re 

el?” ovTws oupipveobat prow. ToOTO be avepov 
OTe advvatov* oUvUTE yap pa poyny € EXOT ovre 
pa Cony Twa Svvait av odleabar, otre Bomep 
(Ga ovra mr«ciw, ovppveadar dor «iva. addy & ev. 
25 GAA pv tobrov Tov Tpdrov aupBaiver A€yew Tois 
amo mavTos amiévar ddoxovoiv, womep TOTE ev 
Th YH emt Tihs proryros, ovTw tovrous ey TO 
cwmpat.. dadvvatov yap ouvext TO. pdpia ylyve- 
ofa, Kal dmevan eis €va TOTOv ovviovTa. €tTa 
ms Kal ‘ dSidonacra.”’ Ta. dvw Kal Karo tad 
defua Kal apiotepa Kai mpdobia Kal dmiobun:; 
30 TavTa yap TadTa. hoya € eoTW. . 
"Erte Ta pepn Ta pev duvduer Ta Sé wabeor did- 
prorat, TO puev dvopo.opepi T@ SvvacGai te movetiv, 
olov yA@rtra Kal xetp, Ta 8 Cuovopeph oxhnpornte 
Kal padaxornre Kat Tots Mors. Tots TovovTots 
mabeow. ov mdvrws ovv éxov alfua ob8¢ odpé.! 
35 SHAov Toivuy dt. advvarov TO ameABov evar ovv- 

1 od... odp£om. &: <alua> alwa obd€ <capé> oapé Bt... 

* According to Empedocles, there were alternating periods 
during which Love and Strife respectively gained the mas- 
tery; for details see Burnet, Early Greek si sc pa 

231 ff. 
oa Emped. fr. 57 (Diels). 

© See Introd. §§ 41. ff. 

4 Viz., in the formation of the embryo. 
¢: Cf. below, 723 b 14 ff, 729 a 7 ff. 

60 

4 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

can when he says in his account of their generation 
during the “ Reign of Love,”* 

There many neckless heads sprang up and grew *; 

later on, he says, they grew on to each other. This 
is clearly impossible : on the one hand, if they had 

not Soul® or life of some sort in them they could 
not remain safe and sound ; and on the other hand, 

_ if they were a number of separate living animals, 

as one might ‘say, they could not grow on to each 

other so as to become’ one’ animal-again. Yet this 

is actually the kind of thing which those people 

_ have to say who allege that the semen is drawn 
_ from the whole of the body: just as it was in the 
_ beginning in the earth in the Reign of Love, so 
it is, according to them, in the. living body.? Of 

course it is impossible that the parts should become | 

_ connected, z.e., come off from the parents so that they 

go together into one place.’ Besides, in any case, 
how were the upper and lower parts, the right and 

_ left, the front and the back, “sundered’’? All 
_ these ideas are fantastic. © 

Further, among the parts, some are distinguished 
by some faculty they possess, others by having cer- 
tain physical qualities /: thus, the non-uniform parts 
(such as the tongue or the hand) are distinguished by 
possessing the faculty to perform certain actions, the 
uniform parts by hardness or softness or other such 
qualities. Unless, therefore, it possesses certain 
Special qualities, a substance is not blood or flesh ; 
and hence it is plain that the substance which is 

_ 7 One of the definitions of dos given at Met. 1022 b 15 
is “a quality (wowdrys) in virtue of which a thing may be 

_ altered, ¢.g., whiteness, blackness, heaviness, lightness, etc.” 

61 

ARISTOTLEOW! £c0TAD 

723 a cvupov: Tots pépeoww, ofov alpa amo aiparos 7, a 
dpa dro oapKos. aAAa pays ev y ef €TEepou Twos 
ovTos ala yiveran, ov av THs OporeTyTos, airvov 
<i, os A€yovow ot doKovres ovr, TO dreABeiv 
amo mdvrov TOV Hoptwy: ixavov yap ag? évos 

5 dméva povov, clrrep pa ef aijuatos ala yeyverat. 
dud rt yap ovK av Kat amavTa et €vos” yeyvorro; 
oO avros yap Adyos Souxev elvas odTos 78) ‘Avaé- 
aydpov, 7T@ pnbev yiyvecbar tav dpovwpepav- 
any exeivos pev emt mavTwy, odtor Oo én ths 
yeveoews Ttav Cawy Tobto Towdaw. emeura Tiva 

10 Tpomov adbénOncerat rabra, Ta ameAOdvra aad may 
TOs 5 ’"Avataydpas pev yap edAdyws gyor oapKas 
€K Tis Tpophs mpoovevas Tats captive tots 5€ rabra. 
pev pr) A€yovow, amo tavtds 8° amvévar PaoKovot, 
mOs étépov mpooyyvonevov eorat preilov, et pH 

/ 

* Cf. note on 721 a3. It has no right to be called by the 
same name (ovvdévypov, implying the same Adyos of its 
essence) because it has not the same qualities, which clearly 
shows that it has not the same essence. 

» This phrase, which at once calls to mind the question 
asked by Anaxagoras (Diels 59 B 10) més yap av ex wi) TpLxos 
yévorro Oplé Kat cap ex pi) capxés; leads on naturally to th 

_ reference to Anaxagoras which immediately follows. " 

¢ According to Anaxagoras, the “‘ uniform °’ substances, 
such as flesh, bone, blood, etc., were to be ranked as elements, 
4.0.5 AS ultimate forms of matter, and therefore ex hypothesi did 
not come into being or pass out of being; and theré was a 
portion of every one of them in every thing. Hence, there 
was a portion of flesh, bone, blood, ete., in all nourishment 
taken by the embryo, and so Anaxagoras could easily 
account for the growth in bulk of the flesh, bone, and blood 
in the embryo. The theory now being examined, says 
Aristotle, seems to make a similar assertion about the semen 
only—this, it holds, contains a portion of flesh, bone, blood, 
ete.—but it does not go on to assert that the nourishment 

62 

r GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvin. 

drawn from the various parts of the parent has no 

right to the same name * as those parts—we may not - 

call that “‘ blood” which is drawn from the parents’ 
blood, and the same with flesh. This means that the 

offspring’s blood is formed out of something which is 
_ other than blood, and if so, then the cause of its 
_ resemblance -will not be due to the semen’s being 
_ drawn from all the parts of the parent’s body, as the 
_ supporters of this theory assert—because if blood is 
_ formed from something that is not blood,® the semen 
_ need only be drawn from one part, there being no 
 yeason all the other constituents as well as blood 
should not be formed out of the one substance. This 
_ theory seems to be identical with that of Anaxagoras.° 
_ im asserting that none of the uniform substances 
_ comes into being ; the only difference is that whereas 
| he applied the theory universally, these people apply 
‘ 

it to the generation of animals. Again, how are 
_ these parts which were drawn from the whole of the 
_ parent’s body going to grow? Anaxagoras gives a 
_ reasonable answer; he says that the flesh already 
_ present is joined by flesh that comes from the nourish- 
_ ment. Those people however, who do not follow 
_ Amaxagoras in the statement just quoted, yet hold 
_ that the semen is drawn from the whole body, are 
_ faced with this question : how is the embryo to grow . 
bigger by the addition of different substance to it 

which the embryo takes in afterwards also contains thene 
Substances.. Hence the theory gets into a difficulty when the 
, suger arises of how the growth of the embryo is effected. 
is difficulty i is avoided by Anaxagoras, because he makes 
his principle “a portion of every element in every thing” 
_ apply universally, and does not limit its application to the 
' Semen only. (For Anax., see A. L. Peck, C.Q. XXV (1931), 
|) 27 ff., 112 ff.) : 

63 

ARISTOTLE })) 545) 
723 4 / . 
peeraBadre* 7d mpooeAOov; adAd pan el ye 
15 d¥varat preraBdAdXew 76 mpoceAddv, Sia Ti odK 
evOds e& apyfs TO omépua towdTdév €otw dor’ 
e€ adtod duvarov elvar yweoba alwa Kal odpKas, 
GAAd pn adro <lvau exeivo Kal afua Kal odpKas; 
ov yap 8 obd€ robdro evddyerar Adyew, ds TH 
Karakepdce. avédverat votepov otov olvos vdaTos 
mpoceyxvevros- avTo _ yap av mpa@rov pddvora 
20 Hv EKAGTOV _dxparov ov: viv de doTepov paMov 1 
Kal oops kal dorodv Kal Tay dAAwy éxaeTov eaTt 
popiwy. Tob be o7épparos pdvas zu vebpov elvar 
Kat doTotv Nav eotiv brép Huds TO Aeyopevov. 
IIpds 5€ tovrois ei TO OFAV Kal TO appev ev TH 
Kunjoe. duadhéper, Kabdmep "EpsedoKdjs Aeyet | 

a 

25 ev 8 eytOn Kabapotor- Ta per dover yor 
vaikes 
ydyeos avricavTa. . . . 

daivovras 5 odv petaBddAovea Kal® yuvaikes Kal — 
avdpes, womep e€€ ayovwv yovysot, oUTw Kal ek 
OnrutéKwy appevordKor, ws odK ev TH arreAOeiv 
amo TavTos 7) fq THS aitias ovons, aA ev TO 
- > > a . 
30 ovpyeTpov 7) GovppeTpov <ivat TO amo THs yu-. 
\ \ ~ > ‘ > / a! A > + \ 
vaikos Kal TOO avdpos amv, 7 Kal dv adAnv Twa 
TovavTnv aitiav. ShAov toivuv, «i tobro Oyjcopev 
4 a > ~ > ral > / . 4 ~ ov > 
oUTws, Tt od TO aTreADetv. amd Twos TO OAAV, WoT 

1 un pote Z: peeve vulg. 
ai PY : om. vulg. 

* Emped. fr. 65 (Diels). Cf. 764 a 1 ff., 765 a 8. 
64 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

‘unless the substance that is added changes? If how- 
ever it is admitted that this added substance can 
change, why not admit straight away that the semen 
at the outset is such that out of it blood and flesh can 
be formed, instead of maintaining that the semen is 
itself both blood and flesh ? They might try to argue 
that jt grows at a later stage by admixture; just as 
wine is increased in bulk by pouring in water; but 
even this line of argument proves impossible, because 
if that were so, then it would surely be at the outset 
that each of the parts was its own proper self, before 
it was mixed, whereas in actual fact it is at a later 
stage that this occurs (I refer of course to flesh and 
bone and every one of the rest of them). And the 
assertion that some of the semen is sinew and bone 
is quite beyond us, as the saying goes. 

Here is another objection. Suppose it is true that 
the differentiation between male and female takes 
place during conception, as Empedocles says * : 

Into clean vessels were they pouréd forth ; 
Some spring up to be women, if so be 
They meet with cold... . 

Anyway, both men and women are observed to 
change: not only do the infertile become fertile, 
but also those who have borne females bear males ; 
which suggests that the cause is not that the semen 
is or is not drawn from the whole of the parents, but 
depends upon whether or not that which is drawn 
from the man and from the woman stand in the right 
proportional relation to each other.® Or else it is 
due to some other cause of this sort. Thus, if we are 
to assume this as true, viz., that the same semen is 

> Cf. 767 a 16, 772'a 17, and Introd. § 39.. 
D 65 

723 a 

723 b 

(ARISTOTLE | (PAS 499 

ovde TO Hépos 6 exeu tWuov 6 TE dppev Kat To O7Av, 
elmep TO avTO ome pha. Kal Orv Kal dppev dvvarat 

35 yiyveoBan ws ovK ovros TOU jeopion + ev TQ onéppart. 

Tt ovv Suapeper € emt Tovrou eye 7 i) emt TOV Mov 
popieo ; a yap pnd? dro Tis borépas. onépp.a. 
yiverat, 6 adtos Adyos Kal émi TOV on Dan @ el 
Hopiwv. on si 
"Eru eva yiverar Tov farm our’ » sbi dieaty di 
ovTe TH yever Siahodpwv, ofov at pviar Kat Ta yevn 

5 Tv kadovjieverr puaray. ex 5é Tovrwr yiveran 

prev CHa, odKére 5° opowa THY poow, aNd. yevos Tt 
oKwAnieny. d7Aov_odv ore ovK amo mayros Mépous 
daridvTos yiyvovras oo. eTEpOyevi}’ Spowa yap, dy 
7s elmep Tob amo TavTos amevat onyetov eoTW %} 
Opmovorns. i 
"Eru amd puds ovvovolas Kal tov Cdwv ena 

10 yevva ToAAd, Ta Se duTa Kal mavTamacw: SHAov 

yap OTL amd pds Kwhoews TOV eméTeLoy TavTa 
déper kaproév. Kaito. mHs Svvardv, ei amo TavTos 
amekpiveTo TO oméppa; pilav yap amdoKpiow amo 
puds avayKatov yiveobar cuvovatas Kal pds SvaKkpi- 
cews. ev d€ Tats daTépats xwpilectar aovvaTtov" 

1 yYodav Em, Aldus, Buss.; A.-W. ‘Platt: pwrav SZ + on 
vulg.; cf. 721 a8 supra. 

« And that the differentiation takes place in the uterus. 

> This does not of course imply a belief in plant fertiliza- 

tion; but the precise meaning of the remark is not clear. 
On comparison with 728 b 35 ff., it appears that the product 
of the ‘‘ one act of coition ” in "animals corresponds to the 
“ seed ” of plants, which also is a ‘‘ fetation,” in which male 
and female are not separate, just as male and female are 

66 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvin. 

able to be formed into either male or female 4% (imply- 
ing that the sexual part is not present in the semen), 
it is clear that it is not the semen’s being drawn from 
some one part which causes the offspring to be female, 
nor, in consequence, is it responsible for the special 
physical part which is peculiar to the two sexes. 
And what can be asserted about the sexual part 
can equally well be asserted about the other parts ; 
since if no-semen comes even from the uterus, the 
same willsurely hold good. of the other parts as well. 
Further, some animals are formed neither from 
ereatures of the same kind as themselves nor from 
creatures of a different kind ;, examples are: flies 
and the various kinds of fleas as they are called. 
Animals are formed from these, it is true, but in these 
eases they are not similar in character to their 
parents ; instead we get a class of larvae. Thus in 
these creatures which differ in kind from their parents 
we clearly have animals which are not formed out of 
semen drawn from every part of the body, for if 
resemblance is held to be a sure sign that this has 
occurred, then they would resemble their parents. 
Further, even among the animals there are some 
which generate numerous offspring from one act of 
coition, a phenomenon which is, indeed, universal 
with plants ; these, as is manifest, produce a whole 
season’s fruit as the result of one single movement.? 
Now how is this possible on the supposition that the 
semen is secreted from the whole body? One act of 
coition, and one effort of segregation, ought neces- 
sarily to give rise to one secretion and no more. That 
it should get divided up in the uterus is impossible, 

combined in the “ fetation ” ofan animal. See also 728 a 27, 
7ilal. 

67 

P ARISTOTLE!) 7 A504 90 

723 b 

15 707 yap domep amo véov dutod 7 Show: wi cri 
[LaTOS ety’ H Staxeprots. 

"Ere 7a amogpurevdjieva a dm abrod déper ore ppc." 
dmpov obv oT. Kal amply arropurev Ova amo 708 
avTod peyeBous" epepe TOV KapTov, Kat ovK dao 
qTavTos Tob duTod aarnet TO omepy.a.. 

Meyworov de rovray TEK EMPLOY reBewoprixapey 

20 ixav@s emi ta&v evrépwv. Kal yap et pr) ev maow, 
adn’ emi tOv mrclotwv ev TH oxela TO Of Ay cis TO 

appev puépos Tt adrToo azroretver [8x0 Kal THV dxelav, 

Kabldmep elmopev mporepov, ovUTW ToLobvTaL|** Ta 
yap Katwhev eis Ta avw dhalverar evadievta, odK 
ev maow, add’ év tots mAcioros TOV. TeVewpy- 
/ @ ‘ n ww hid 299 & he , 
25 PEVWV. WOTE davepov av €ty) OTL ovd 000 TpoLleTat 
yoviy T&v appevwv, od TO Amo TaVvTOS amlevat TIS 
/ ” / 2 > > » SX yes rat 
yevéoews aitidv eotw, add’ aAdAov twa TpdToV, 
mept ob oKerréov Vorepov. Kal yap eimep TO A710 
LA 

mavTos amrLevat ovveBawvev, worep pact, ovbev 
ede amo mavTwV dgvoby dmeva, adAd pdvov amo 
30 To0 Snuoupyodvros, olov dad tod TékTovos GAAd 

~ ~. 4 
fq) Gro THs UAns. vov 8 dpovov Aéyovow. womep 

~ o¢ 

Kav et amo THv drodnpdtwv: axeddov yap 6 djovos* 
vios TH TaTpl Guowa dopet. ite 

> a ¢ / 
"Or. 8 7S0v7) ofodpa yiverau ev TH dmiAta TH 

1 dnd. . . etn) awd Chou oréppa rovet Z, sim. E. 
2 wépovs coni. Bonitz. 3 seclusi: om. X. | 

4 6 dpoos P : duos tus Vulg.: dpotos Z. 

* The text is probably corrupt; for the sense ef. 729 a 6 ff. 
> Ch. 16. 

68 

es 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvnt. 

for by that time the division would be made as it were 
from a new plant or animal, not of semen.* 

Further, transplanted cuttings bear seed—derived, 
of course, from themselves; which is proof positive 
that the fruit they bore before they were trans- 
planted was derived from that identical amount of 
the plant which is now the cutting, and that the 
seed was not drawn from the whole of the plant. 

The weightiest proof of all, however, we have 
sufficiently established by our observations of Insects. 
Perhaps not in all Insects, but certainly in most, 
during copulation the female extends a part of itself 
into the male [so, as we said earlier,” this is actually 
the .way in which they effect copulation]: the 
females can be seen inserting something into the 
males upwards from below. ‘This does not apply to 
all Insects, but to most of those which have been 
observed. Hence surely it is clear that even in the 
ease of those males which discharge semen genera- 
tion is not caused by the semen’s being drawn from 
the whole of the body, but it is brought about in some 
other way, which we must consider later‘on. And 
indeed, if it were really true that the semen is drawn 
from the whole body, as these people say, there would 
still be no call for them to assert that it is drawn 
from all the parts ; they need only say itis drawn from 
the creative part which does the fashioning—from 
the artificer, in other words, not from the material 
which he fashions. . As it is, they talk as though even 
the shoes which the parent wears were included 
_ among the sources from which the semen is drawn, 
for on the whole a son who resembles his father wears 
shoes that resemble his... 

It is true that there is intense pleasure in sexual 

6 

ARISTOTLE.) 5 6) 

723 b ayy Oe 
T&v adbpodiwiwv, od TO amd TAaVTOS amvévaL atTLov, 

35 GAN’ Gru Kvnopes eat ioxupds: 816 Kal ef mroANdus 

724a  aupBaiver % djudAa avry, Frrov yiveras 76. xaipew 
rots mAnoidlovow. ere mpos TO TéAeL xapd- eeu 

dé ev éxdoTe TaV popiwr, Kal pa aye) adr & 

eh ba 
zee 

Tod 8 éx KodroBay yivecOau Kodopa % adr) alria 

jeev TOUS ™pOTEpov év de Tots Sarepov. 

5 kat dia Tt Gpota Tots yovedow. yiverar Se Kal od 
KoroBa ex KodroPdv, wamep. Kal dydpova. rahe en 
Kvadoacw* rept dv borepov Tv airtay Pewpnréov: 
TO yap mpoPAnya Tobd7’ exeivors Tabtov eoTw. th 

"Ere ef 70 OFAv ph mpoterat omrépjia., Too abrob 
Adyou pyS dad wavtds dmevar. Kav eb py amd 

10 mavros amépyeTat, obbev aAoyov TO pnd? amo rob 
OnAcos, aA aAdov twa Tporov. altLov elvat 76 
OnAv Tis yevéoews. mept od 87 exopevov €orw 
emoxewsacbar, émed1) havepov OTe OK G70 mdvrev 
amoxkpiverar TO OTépua TOV popiwy. f 

’"Apx?) S€ Kal ravTys THs oKdbews Kal TOV éro- 

15 évwv mpOrov AaBeiv wept omépparos ti €or: 
ovTw yap Kal Tepl TOY épywy abrod Kal Tov Trept 
adro cupPavovrwv éorar wadAov ededpnrov. Bov- 
Aerar Sé Tovodrov tiv dvow clvar TO o7éppa, e& 

we. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvin. 

intercourse. The cause of this however is not that 
the semen is drawn from the whole body, but that 
- there is violent stimulation ; and that of course is 
why those who indulge often in such intercourse. de- 
rive less pleasure from it. Moreover, the pleasure in 
fact comes at the end, but according to the theory it 
should occur (a) in every one of the parts, and (6) not 
simultaneously, but esslier in some and later in 
_ others. | 

As. for mutilated offspring being produced by 
mutilated parents, the cause is the same as that which 
makes pe resemble their parents.. And any- 
way, not all offspring of mutilated parents are muti- 
lated, any more than all offspring resemble their 

ents. The cause of these things we must consider 
_ later*; the problem in both cases is the same. 
| Moreover, if the female does not discharge any 
semen, then it is consistent to say that the semen is 
not drawn from the whole body either; or again, if 
it is not drawn from the whole body, there is nothing 
inconsistent in saying that it is not drawn from the 
female either,’ but that the female is responsible for 
generation in some other way than this. This, in 
fact, will be the next subject for us to investigate, 
now that it is clear that the semen is not secreted 
from all the parts of the body. 

We must begin this investigation and those which Definition 
are to follow by discovering first of all what semen is ; ° “°""" 
this will enable us to consider more easily its func- 
tions and everything connected with it. Now the 
aim of semen is to be, in its nature, the sort of stuff 
from which the things that take their rise in the realm 

@ Bk, IV, chh. 3f. 
> Of. 721 b 10. 

71 

ARISTOTLE rad 
124 a eA \ , 4 Pap at Cee, 
od Ta Kara dvow ovviordpeva yiverar mpwrov [od 
T@ €€ €xeivov T1 elvat TO Tovdy, olov Tod avOpadrrov- 
‘ | FG RR re wee : 
20 ylyveras yap €k TovTOv, O71 TOOTS €aTt Td oTépual*. 
es Mr A r ” 96 yy ep t f 
eet Sé todays yiyverac dAdo é€ GAA ov—€TEpoy 
yap Tpotov, ws €€ juépas paper vvE yiyverar Kat 
> 5c mae cy s§ \ 4 aw Se , 
Ex TaLd0s avip, OTe TOE peTa TOdE* GAAoV. dé Tpd- 
Tov, ws eK xaAdKob avdpias Kal ex EvAov KAwn, 
\ > 7 ¢ >? LA / \ / - 
25 Kat TaAAa doa ws e& Ans ylyvecBar Ta yryvdpeva 
Aéyouev, ex Twos evuTdpyovTos Kal oxnpari- 
4 ‘ Ld > / 7 - \ / c. : 
abévros TO GAov eariv. Erepov S€ Tpdmov Ws eK 
fovotKod apovoos Kal ws e& byvots Kdpvwv, Kal 
~ . : 7 f . 4 
GAws ws TO evavtiov €k Tod evayTiov. é7t de 
Tapa Tatra, ws ’Emixappos, moved Thy €mouKod0- 
> a a ¢ , > i Ao. 
pnow, ex Tis SvaBoAfjs 7 AowWopia, ex Se ravTns 
307) paxn: Tatra dé mavta €K Twos %° apyxt) THs 
KwHoews, TOV dé TowovTw eviwy pev ev adrois 

Se ee 

i eta, 

1 seclusi: od 7@ e& exetvou twos, olov ex Tod avOpwov, ore 
rovrou ti €oTt 76 oméppa: émecd)) S¢ etc. Aldus: alia alii edd. 
vide et not. Anglice seriptam. | un 

2 4 Platt: 7 vulg. 

® With this definition, ¢f. 716 a 7 ff., 721 b 6, and Phys. — 
190 b 3-5.—At this point in the Greek text there follow 
some unintelligible phrases which I have omitted from the 
translation. The version of them given in the ed. princeps — 
differs considerably from that in the Berlin edition, and they 
may be fragments of some annotation upon the definition 
(founded perhaps on some such passage as 765 b 12; 13 (q.v.) 
or, more probably, on Il. 724 b 2-4, where cf. note and refer- — 
ence to Physics ; dv@pwzos is there used as an illustration and — 
there may have been a similar illustration here, which has — 
been corrupted), Actually any addition to the definition, — 
as apart from an illustration of it, at this point is inappro- 
priate, as Aristotle is here giving the simplest and basic 
definition, from which he builds up his final definition ; this 

72 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvii. 

_ of Nature are originally formed.* There are, how- 
_ ever, numerous senses in which one thing is formed 
; or comes into being “ from ”’ another >: (1) as we say 

1 

“from day comes night,” and ‘ ‘ from boy comes 

_ man,” meaning that the one comes after the other ; 

_ (2) as a statue is formed from bronze, or a bedstead 
from wood, and all those cases where we describe 
‘5 as being formed from some material ; here the 
finished whole has been fashioned into a certain shape 
from something which was there to begin with; 

(3) as a person may become uncultured from being 
cultured or ailing from healthy, 7.e., all cases of 
a contrary coming from. its contrary; (4) as in a 
“cumulative ’’ passage in Epicharmus¢: e.g., from 

slander comes abuse, from abuse a fight; in all 
_ these cases “‘ from so-and-so’ means that so-and-so 

is the source of the movement,“ and in some instances 

is also abundantly clear from the argument which immedi- 

ately follows. - 

_ OF. the similar discussion, with some of the same 

_ examples, on the meaning of “ from ” in Met. 1023 a 26 ff. ; 
, also a daar 

icharmus of Sicily (Aristot. Poet. 1448 a 33) was the 

| chief Dorian comic poet. Aristotle may have in mind a 

of his similar to that quoted by Athenaeus (ii. 36 c, d), 

and Suidas, which G. Kaibel (Comicorum Graecorum Frag- 

menta, I. i. p. 118) prints as follows, with the Doric vowels 
restored and with the emendations of various scholars : 

A. &x pev Buacias Boiva, 
éx S€ Ooivas soars, eyévero. B. xapier, as y (epi (Soxe?). 

A. ex 3€ mdav0s waxKos, ek pebKou ” évyével?’ davia, 
€x & davias (Sika. . ., €x dixas SS xara)dixa, 

ex S€ xatadixas médar te Kal adadds xai Capia. 

See also A. Lorenz (Leben uw. Schriften des Koers Epicharmos, 

p. 271). Cf. Aristot. Met. 1023 a 30, 1013 a 10, Rhet: 
1365 a 16. 
4 i.e., the “* Efficient ’’ or ‘‘ Motive’? Cause: 

73 

ARISTOTLE iT) 1: 
724 a ey 3 A a , , 2 ; : 1. <9 a 
x gt ecg ees olov Kat ev Tots viv 
eipnprevors (H€pos yap Te BiaBoryy ras aréons 

Srey 

Tapayys eotiv), eviwy 8 €éw, ofov at réxvan Tay 
On puoupyoupeveny Kat 6 _ dixvos as ats 
35 OiKias. ss 
To dé ore pps dase’ OTe Sibi! es Ba 
Tépw eoriv" 7 yap ws ee Bs adroo 12 os ek api 
724b TOU Kuoavros, €OTL TO YivO_EVOY. ob. yap. 3) abs 
Tdd€ peta THd¢, olov ex TOv. Ilavabnvaiwy. 6 mods, 
ovo ws ef evavTiov" POerpopevov TE mabe. yiyveras 
TO evavtiov €k Tob évavTiov, Kat Erepoy ote Bet 
broxetabar e€ ob Eorat mpdirov evuTdpxovros. Tov 
5 bvoiv 57) Anerréov ev TOTEPP Qergov tO omepia, 
moTepov ws vAnVY Kal mdcxov 7 ds «ldds TL Kai 
movody, H Kal dpper. dpa. yap lows dfjAov Earas 
Kat TAs 77 < evavTiwy yevecis Omdpxer! mdot Tots 
€k Too oméppiaros’ puouct) yap Kal i éK« TOV 
evavTiov yeveots” TO. pev yap ef evar ieti yeyeras 
10 dppevos Kal Onreos, Ta 8 € €vos povov, olov Ta. 
| te pura Kal Trev Gdieow Evid, €v Ooows [Ly €ort 
Suwpioprevov TO SPP Kat To OAAv > xeopis. 

14 Z: om. . vulg. 

® i.¢., either (2) or (4) above. 

Of. the discussion on the meaning of piiwtlgts and 
seed é« twos in Phys. 190 a 5 ff. ‘These contraries are 
merely attributes of something else, something which has 
being (odoia), is a concrete existing thing, and. is the * sub- 
strate *’ : Kal yap TOGOY Kal TroLtoy. . - yiveran dmoKetp évou 
tuvds(190a35). If wesay thata man “ becomes ” ” cultured 
* from ” being uncultured, it is “ man ” that persists through- 

74 

2 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvut. 

this sort the source of the movement is within 
the things themselves, as in the ones just quoted 
(where slander is actually one part of the whole 
‘0-do) ; in others it is external to them ; e.g., crafts- 
mans of every kind is external to the works 

v the’ craftsman produces, and the torch is 
| f Bcciat to the house which is set on fire. 

‘one or other of these two senses*: the onepeiny is 
formed “from” it either (a) as “ from ” material, 
or (6) as“ from ” a prime mover (a source of move- 
'ment). It is definitely not an instance of (1) above, 

where “from” means “ after,” e.g., “ from the 
' Panathenaean festival comes the sea-voyage”’; nor 
(3), .e., of coming into being “from ”’ a contrary ; 
for the one contrary is destroyed as the other comes 

into being from it, and so there must be present 
besides them some primary substrate, from which 

she new contrary is: to come into being.” Thus we 
now have to discover in which of the two classes 
"Semen is to be placed : Is it to be regarded as matter, 
.e., as something which is acted upon, or as a form, 
|i.e., as something which acts of ‘itself—or even as 
both ? for perhaps at the same time it will also be 

'place in all things that arise from semen. (After 
ll, formation from contraries as well as the other 
Sethods of formation is found in nature ; some ani- 
nals are formed from contraries—male and female, 
hough some are formed from one parent only, as are 
jlants and certain of the animals in which there is no 
‘definite separation of male and female.) 

mt the change. Clearly, says Aristotle, this is not the 
| Meaning of yiyvecfa: required here. 
75 

ANRISTOFLEOTTS Tae 
4b. 

[P Ovi) pev ody TO amd ‘TOO yewavros: Karetrav 
amov,” doa ovvdvdlecBau mépue, TO mp@rov éxov 
apxny yeverews, oméeppia Sé TO €€ duporepaw “ras 

15 apxas eXoV Tov owvdvacbévra, lov” 7a TE TO 
putav Kad evi Coa, ev ois pa) pia ph TO 
Ondv Kal TO dippev,” warrep TO YUYVOLLEVOY €K OiAcos 
Kat GPPEVOS, Tp@Tov piypa, olov KUNG. TL Ov i 
wov"* Kab yap Tatra, 707 € exeu TO €& duporv. Dan 

Liméppa de Kat Ka,p7ros Sade per TO ee Kab 

20 mporepov' Kapm0s yey yap TO e& dM ov elvan, 
o7éppia. de T@ €K TOUTOV iMo, érret a had ye 
Travrov’ €oTwW. ratty 

‘H dé rod Neyopévou omdpparos diowss yi nek 
mdAw Aexréa Tis €or. 

“Avdynn 67) 7é&v,'O av NapBdoeoyrer ev TO ob 
part, 4 fepos elvat TOV KaTa piow, kat TOOTO 7) 

25 TOV dvopovopLepayy 7 TOV dpLovope pv, 7 TOv mapa 
gvow, olov dopa, 7 Te plrTe|Lo. 7 ovvrny po. i) 
Tpopny. Adyen dé TepirTwfea Bev TO 77s zpopiis 
imdAcypa, ovvTnypa dé. 76. dmoKpilev ek TOO" 

Livy. 12-22 inepta seclusi. ¥e Be 

2 amov P: cuit Xs aizov.vulg.., ot 

° olov.. . ».appev seclusenat Platt. ih 

4 3év Wimmer, sicut ovum =: Cov vulg. ¥ 
5 fortasse 706 adrod scribendum. Ses 

8 &s yovns addit Z. MrTor 

7 é« tobd| éxadorov PSZ. Zhen 

- 

* The following paragraphs seem to be an interpolation. 
They interrupt the argument; further definitions are here 
inappropriate, and one of those here given is incorrect. 
Besides, Aristotle does not in the Generation of Animals 
make the distinction between yov and omépya. These 
definitions seem to have been put in here because the fol- 
lowing passage contains some definitions. 

76 ° 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvun. 

_ *[Seminal fluid is. the name given to that which 
comes from the generating parent, in the case of those 
_ animals whose nature it is to copulate, and it is that 
"in which a generative principle is first found. Semen 
peru the name given to that which contains the 

es derived om both the. parents which have 
. (254 as in the case of the plants and certain 
Goirtials in which male and female are not separate, 
jai oe Best mixture which i is formed from the male 

from both parents. 
~ Semen (eed) and fruit differ by the “prior and 
; posterior >”: fruit (is posterior) in that it is.derived 
from something else, whereas seed {is prior) in that 
Something else is derived from it, since in fact. they 
are both one and the same thing. | 
__ We must-now resume and state what ig the primary 
nature of semen, as it is called.] __ 
_ _ Now every substance, whatever it may be, that we 
find in the body, must of necessity be one of the 
| following: (1) one of the parts which are there in 
_ accordance with nature, in which case it will be one 
of the uniform or non-uniform parts ; (2) one which 
is there contrary to nature, e.g.,a tumour; (3) re- 
a due“; (4) colliquescence a, a) nourishment. By 
_ residue . mean that, which is left over as surplus from 
the nourishment ; | by colliquescence that which is 
given off as an ahsceieion’ from the material that 
|» The meaning of these terms is. discussed in Met, 
018 b 9 ff. 
__ * See Introd. §§ 65 ff. ' 
 # See Introd. § 67: also 725 a 27 ff. and De somno et 
ig. 456 b 34 ff. 

* See Introd. § 67. 

77 

ARISTOTLE iit Am 

724 b ) / ¢ A on A 4 Ld « 
avenparos 70 Tis Tapa vow dvahioews. OTe 
pev oby odie dv ely [L€pos, pavepov" Oprovojtepes 
30 jLev yap cor, ex be ToUTou odfev avyKerat, 
@oTEp eK vevpou Kal oapKos. ru 8¢ odde Ke- | 
Xewpiopevor, Ta & adda Tavera pépn. a AAd. py 4 
ovde tay" Tapa prow, ovde Ti pwpa* ev dmact TE 
yap vmdapyel, Kal 7) pvous eK TouTou ylyveran. 4 
dé Tpod) pavepas eTTELOaKTOV. aor’ dvd: en) 9 
35 owvTnyLa 1 UE TeplTT}La. elvan. ob ev oby apxator : 
| colkacw oloprevois elvar ovvTny pa 70 yap amd 
TAVTOS dmrvevat pdvar dud. THY Geppornta tH amo | 
725 a THs KWHoEwWs ouvTHypaTos exer Svayw. TO de — 
awTnyya” tav Tapa dvow tL, €k d€ TAY Tapa 
vow odfev yiverar Tav Kata dvow, avdyKyn apa 
Tepirrwpa elvar. aAAd. pay mepirrapd ye Trav 7) 

5 dxprjorou tpophs €oTrw 7 xenowns: dxpnorov 
ev obv Aéyw ad” Hs pynPev Er. ovvredActrat eis THY 
pow, aN’ dvahoKopevov mA€ovos padora Kom 
kodrat, Thy dé xpnoiunv THY évayriav. OTL pev 
31) Towdrov mepitTwpa ovK av ein, davepdv’ Tots 

1 od ray Z: oddé vulg.: correxerunt A.-W. 
2 76 8€ otvrnypa S*: ra dé cvvtyypara vulg. 

@ And therefore would have to be reckoned as one of the 
uniform parts. 
> Viz., the non-uniform parts, for the construction of which 
the uniform parts act as the “ material.” ie | 
¢ This may mean that it is not present continuously as 
such, but has to be “ concocted ” and “ collected ” on each — 
occasion for which it is required: see 717 b 25. 
4 See Introd. § 12 and 737 a 26, n. : 
* e.g., Hippocrates, 7. yovfs 1 (vii. 470 Littré), where this } 
statement occurs. Aristotle’ s equation of this view with the | 
belief that semen is a ovvrnypa is hardly fair, in face of the | 
context, q.v. Compare, é.g., the statement 7 5é yov7 . 

78 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvmt. 

supplies growth, as the result of decomposition pro- 
ceeding contrary;to nature. Now it is clear that 
semén cannot possibly be (1) one of the parts ; since 
although it is uniform,? it does not serve as, the 
material out of which any other parts ” are composed, 
as sinew. and flesh do ; nor again is it separate and 
distinct,’ whereas all the other parts are. Nor (2) is 
it something contrary to nature, or a deformation,@ 

a) because it is present in every single individual, and 
(6) because the natural organism develops out of it. 
As for (5) nourishment, obviously this is introduced 
into the body from without. It must therefore be 
_ either (4) a colliquescence’ or (3) a residue. The 
early thinkers appear to\ have supposed it was a 
colliquescence, because to say that it is drawn from 
the whole body in virtue of the heat which the move- 
ment produces,’ is equivalent, to saying that the 
semen is a colliquescence.. But. colliquescence be- 
longs to the class of things that are contrary to nature, 
and from such things nothing that is in accordance 
with nature is ever formed. Therefore the semen 
must of necessity be a residue. Very well. Every 
residue results either from useful or from useless 
nourishment. By “useless nourishment” I mean 
that which contributes nothing further to the natural 
organism and which if too much of it is consumed 
causes very great injury to the organism; “ useful 
nourishment ” is the opposite of this. It is obvious 
that semen cannot be a residue resulting from useless 
nourishment, for while residue of that sort is found in 

Epxetas amo mavTos Tod Uypod Tod ev TH odiari eovros TO -icxv- 
porarov amoxpilév- tovrou dé iardpiov Tdd€, Gre amoKpiverau TO 
toxupétarov, ott emi. Aayvedooper apixpov ovTw ebevtes, 
dobevees ywopue8a with Aristotle’s own statement at 725 b 6-8. 

79 

ARISTOTLE fe) : 

725 a 
yap KdK.oTa Brareynevors bv TAuciav 1) vooovs 
mhetorov evuapxer TowdTov, omrépjua. de HKvora." 
‘yap ohus ovK éxovow 7 od ydvutov dud 76 pui- 
10 youoGau dxpnorov mepirra.a Kal voonpariKdy. ae 

Xpyoipov dpa TEpurTéaros Hépos Te €oTl TO 
o7Trepjia. Xpyoywararor d€ TO €axarov Kal & ob 
707, yiverat EKaOTOV TOV Hopiov. éoru yap TO 
ev ‘TpoTepov To 8 vorepov. Tis Lev odv mparns 

15 Tpodijs TEpiTT@pLa. préypa kal et Tt dAdo Towodrov: 
Kal yap TO preypa Tis. xpnolpou tpobhs meptr- 
Twud ect: onetov 5 OTe pryvdpevov Tpodh Ka- 
Gapa tpéper Kal movodo. KatavadioxeTa. TO de 
teXevtaiov €x mAciorns Tpodiis dAtyvotov.®  evvoeiv 
dé Set dru puxp@ adfaverar Ta CHa Kai Ta dura 

20 7@* Kal?’ Auepav: tappiKpod® yap av mpoorWemevov 
T® abt@® trepéBadre? ro péyeHos. 

Todvavriov dpa 7) ot apxator éAeyov Aekréov. of 
pev yap TO amo TOVTOS amd, Tipets dé TO pos 
day iévat mepuKos ome €povpev, Kal ot pev 
cvvTnypa, paiverar dé mepitrwya paddov. €d- 

25 NoyuiTtepov yap Gpouov elvat TO TpooLoV EaxaToV 
Kal TO TEpLTTOV. ywopevov TOD ToLOvTOV, Olov Tots 
ypahedar tod avdpeéAov moAAdKis mrepuyiveTau 

ee es 

1 yooov } eéw Z. 
2 evundpye. PZ: dndpxer vulg. 
3 yiyvera add. PZ*, 7@ PY: vo vulg. |. 
5 qrappuxpod A.-W.: mav- puxpod vulg. : locus hic corruptus. 
6 +@ adr Platt: rod adrod vulg. 

7 SmepéBadre PY: tzepéBade vulg. : SmepPador Platt. 

@ See Introd. § 66. > Cf. 728 a 31, n 

© Cf. 165 b 29 ff. 
@ Because it is the concocted residue of blood, the ‘* ulti- 
mate nourishment ” distributed to all the parts of the body. 

80 

ree nag Oe een 

ws) 

Bsa ae. eee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvii. 

considerable quantities in those who through age or 
disease are in a very bad state of health, the same is 
not true of semen ; such persons either have none at 
all, or if they lrave, it is infertile because of the useless 
and diseased residue that gets mixed with it. 

Hence, semen is part of a useful residue ; and the 
most useful of the residues is that which is produced 
last, that from which each of the parts of the body is 
directly formed. I said “last,” for of course some 
of the residues are produced earlier, some later. 
Nourishment in its first stage yiélds as its residue 
phlegma and any other such stuff.* Yes, phlegma too 
is a residue from the useful nourishment, as is shown 
by the fact that when it is mixed with pure nourish- 
ment it nourishes the body,’ and that the body con- 
sumes it in cases of disease. The residue which 
comes last, however, is very small in bulk though 
the nourishment which yields it is very large* ; but 
we must bear in mind that it requires very little 
to supply the growth of animals and plants from 
day to day, since the continual addition of a very 
small amount to the same thing would make its 
size excessive. 

Our own statement therefore must be the opposite 
of what the early people said. They said the semen 
is that which was drawn from the whole of the body ; 
we are going to say the semen is that whose nature 

_ it is to be distributed to the whole of the body.? And 

whereas they said it was a colliquescence, we see it is 

_ more correct to call it a residue. | After all, it is more 
reasonable to suppose that the surplus residue of the 

final nourishment which is distributed all over the 

Semen a 
‘** residue.” 

body resembles that nourishment, just as (to take a - 

_ common instance) the paint left over on an artist’s 

81 

= 

ARISTOTLE a 

725 a e Hae 
Gpovov TH avadwhévrr. avvrnkdpevov S€ Pbeiperar 
nav Kat e€iorarar THs dvcews. TeKprpiov dé Tod 

- py obdvTnypa elvat ddAa tepitrwya paddrov, TO 
30 7a peydAa Tav Cobwv ddvyoréKa elvat, TA SE piKpa 
Tmoddyova. avrvTnypya pev yap mA€ov dvayKatov 
elvar Tots peydAois, mepirrwpa 8° eAartov: els yap 
TO oGya péya ov avadioxetat Td mAcioTov THs 
tpopis, war dXdtyov yiverau TO TEpitTwpya. Tt 
Tom0s auvTiypat. pev ovbels dmodéSoTa: Karta 
35 dvow, adda pet omov av ebodijon Tod owparos, 
725 b tots d€ Kata Piow mepiTTwmpacr Taow, olov THs 
tpodis tis Enpas 7 Kdtw Koirla Kal THs dypas 

9 KUoTIs Kal THs xpnoiuns 7 dvw KotAla, Kal Tots 
omeppatiKois’ voTepat Kat aidota Kal pacrot eis 

rovtous yap a0poilerar Kal ovppe?. Kal papripia 

57a ovpPatvovra 6te TO eipnuevov omépya eariv: 

Tatra d€ ovpPaiver dia 7d tiv ddow elvat Tod 
TEpiTTwpaTos TovavTnY® 4 Te yap EeKAvois eda- 

xlotov ameddvros rovtov yiverar émidndos, ws 
OTEPLOKOMEVA TA GWUATA TOD EK THS Tpopis ywo- 

puevov teAovs. (dXrlyous 5€é Tiow ev puLKP@ xpdve 

10 kata Tas HAcKias Koudiler Tobr’ amudv, dtrav mA¢o- 

vaon, Kaldarep 7) mpwtyn tpody, av dmrepBadAn TH 

TAnGe: Kai yap tadrys amiovens TA oupaT €d- 

S eae ee 

a 

1 trois omepuaticois PSZ: ris omepparixgs vulg. 

2 Oru. . . Tovadrny forbisse sectatenda (RW), vel drt 76 
onéppa mepittwud €or xxpjoyov scribendum; vertit =X et 
accidentia quae accidunt testificantur quod sperma est super- 
fluum quo indigetur ad iuvamentum. 

* For éfiotacba ris dicews, see 768 a 2, n. 
» i.e, the large intestine. 
© 4.e., the small intestine. 

—_— 2 

i ey 

RS 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvn. 

palette resembles that which he has actually used ; 
whereas everything that undergoes colliquescence 

ets destroyed and departs from its proper nature.* 
fee is a piece of evidence to show that semen is 
not a colliquescence but a residue: the large 
animals produce but few young, while the small 
ones are prolific. Now in the large animals there 
must of necessity be more colliquescence and. less 
residue, because most. of the nourishment is used 
up to maintain the large bulk of their body, so that 
but little residue is produced. Further, no. place 
has been assigned by Nature for colliquescence, but 
it runs about in the body wherever it can find a clear 
way for itself ; whereas there is a proper place for all 
the natural residues—e.g-, the lower intestine ? is set 
apart for the residue from the solid nourishment, the 
bladder for that from the fluid, the upper intestine ° . 
for that from the useful nourishment, the uterus, 
pudenda, and breasts for the seminal residues—they 
run into these places and collect there. As evidence 
of the truth of our statement about what semen is 
we can quote the actual facts, facts which directly re- 
sult from this residue’s being of the nature described 
by us. Thus (1) though only a very small quantity of 
semen be emitted, the exhaustion which follows is 
quite conspicuous,? which suggests that the body is 
being deprived of the final product formed out of the 
nourishment, (There are, 1 know, a few who for a 
short peridd: during the. heat .of youth derive relief 
from the emission of the semen when it is super- 
abundant. The same is true also of nourishment in 
its first stage, if there is an excessive quantity of it ; 

* Cf. Hippocrates, 7. yor7s 1 (vii. 470 Littré), quoted in 
note on 725 a 1. 

83 

725 b 

ARTSTOTLEOIMY ASSAYED 

npepe? pGAdAov. ere Grav ovvarin aGAda TepitTa- 
para od yap povov omépa TO ii GAAa Kal 
erepat prepry preva Suvdpers TOUTW" ouvamepxovTat, 
15 adrau dé vacddets, 510 eviwy ye Kal dyovev MOTE 
yiverau TO atroxwpody dia TO ddiyor €, Exe. TO omep 
parikov. dAAa tots mAcloTos Kal ws emi Td TOAD 
cizreiv ovpBaiver €k tdv adpodiwacuav exdAvors 
Kal dduvapia paNAov dua THY elpnpcevny airiav.) 
eTL ov evuTrapyet oméppia. OUT ev TH morn WAucig 
20 ovr” ev TD ype. ovr ev Tals dppworias, ev pev 
TO Kapvew dia THY advvapiay, ev d€ TO ynpa Sia 
TO pa méTTEW TO tKaVvOV ry dvaw, véois 8 odat 
dua mill avenour pbdver yap dvadvoxdpevov av" 
ev €reou yap eve oxeddv ent ye Ta avOpebrreay 
" Hpuoy AapPdvew doKel TO capa Tob peyelovs Tob 
25 ev T® GAAw xpdove yuyvopEvou dmavros. 

[loAAois 82 ovpPaiver Kat C@ous Kal porois Kal 
yéveot pos yevn Siadopa wept Taira Kav TO yévet 
T® abT@ Tots dpoedéor mpds aAAnAa, olov avOparra 
mpos avOpwirov Kai apméAw mpos apimedov. Ta 
pev yap troAvoTeppa ta 8° dAvydomepud €oTL, Ta 

30 & doepya mapmrav, od du aobeverav, add’ eviois ye 
dua* todvartiov: KaravanrioxeTar yap <is TO O@pa, 
olov trav avOpumwv eviois edeKTuKOl yap OvTes Kal 
ywopevor modvoapKo. 7 mdTEpo. paAAov Arrov 
mpotevrat oméppia Kal Arrov emiBupodor Tod ad- 

1 zovrm Platt: rovros vulg. 2 8a PZ: om. vulg. 

@ 7.¢., of nourishment. >» Or, muscle. 

84 

a a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvi. 

the body is more comfortable for having got rid of it. 
Relief is obtained too when other residues are got rid 
of in company with the semen: in such cases what 
is emitted is not merely semen, but there are other 
substances which come away at the same time mixed 
up with it, and these are morbid. This explains why 
at certain times with some persons the emission is 
infertile : it contains so small an amount of actual 
epee However, speaking generally for the major- 
of men, the sequel to sexual intercourse is ex- 
flasstion and weakness rather than relief, and the 
cause is as I have described.) Besides (2), semen is 
absent during childhood, old age, and infirmity ; 
absent during infirmity on account of the weakness 
of the body, during old age because the organism 
does not concoct a sufficient amount *; during child- 
hood because the body is growing, and the concocted 
matter is all used up so soon that there is none left 
over : it is usually held that in about five years human 
beings, at any rate, grow to one-half of the complete 
size that they will attain in the rest of their lifetime. 
In respect of semen we find that with many animals 
and plants one group differs from another group, and 
even within one and the same group individuals of 
the same kind differ from each other, e.g., one man 
from another, and one grape-vine from another. 
Some individuals have much semen, some little, some 
none at all; and this is not due to any bodily weak- 
ness, but in some cases, at any rate, it is due to the 
opposite : the available supply gets used up to benefit 
the body ; as an example of this we have men in 
sound health putting on rather a lot of flesh® and 
getting a bit fat: these emit less semen and have 
less desire for sexual intercourse than is normal. <A 

85 

725 b 

726 a 

35 

or 

10 

15 

? MRISTOTLE (TA 14450 

podtoralew. dpovov 5€ Kal TO mepl Tas Tpaydaas 
dyuméXous 780s, at dud i tpodyy e€vBpilovow 
(€rel Kal of Tpdyou moves ovres arrov bxevovow, 
810 Kal mpodenrdvovow avrous* iat Tas djurréhous 
Tpayay do TOU mous TOV Tpdywv Kadodow). 
Kal ob moves dé dyovesTepor patvovTat elvan TOV 
fq) TuOvev, Kal _yuvaires Kal dv8pes, dia. TO..TOUs: 
edTpapeat mer TOMEVOY 70 mEepitT wpe, yiveoBau Tl~ 
peeAnv: €are yap Kal: rt mryLeAn) seg ake oo + 
edBooiav dyrewvov. te 
"Eva 8 ows ovde deper omepiia., bby pea’ Kal 

ailyeipos. lat pev ody éexdTepat airiar’ tovTov 

A / 
Tov maQouvs. Kat yap du advvapiiay ov meTTOVaL 

Kat dud. Suvapuy dvaXioKovaw, WoTrEp cipro. 

opotws dé Kal mohixod? €oTl Kal mobomeppo® Ta. 
pev dia. Sdvapwy 7a dé dv advvayiav- rodd yap Kat 
ax pnoTtov mepirrepa oupptyvurat, war’ eviews yi- 
yoeodar Kal dppwornia, orav adrav’ pr edodyjon) 

1 amoKnabapars. Kat ‘Evtoe peev dyidlovrat, ‘ot ra 

Kal dvaupodvra. ourryjKovra yap Taw: “Borep 
Kal els TO odpov: 767 yap Kat Toor’ alicia 
ovveBn Tiolv. 
ak Ett 6 TOpos, 6 avros TO meperrdparre Kat 7 
oméppati: Kal dools , wey dudoiv ylyvera. mepir= 
: éxdrepat airiat scripsi, post A.-W., qui atria édrepau : 
airias kal €repar P, Kai €repac airiac vule: (aliae 3). : 
* moduxpoved, PSY fac 

3 Kal moAvoTeppa. fort. secl, 
4 vy, 16-25 seclusit Platt ; 725 b 25—726 a 15 seclusit Sus, 

* The former part of this interpolation seems to belong to 
the interpolation connected with chh. 12 and 13 (ef. 719 

86 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvin. 

_ similar phenomenon is that of grape-vines which 

_ “go goaty,” rampaging all over the place because 
_ they are getting too much nourishment. (The reason 
for the phrase “ go goaty ”’ is that they behave just 
like he-goats, which when they get fat indulge less 
in copulation, and incidentally this explains why goats 
are made to slim before the breeding season comes 
on.) And further it seems that fat people, men and 
women alike, are less fertile than those who are not 
fat, the reason being that when the body is too well 
fed, the effect of concoction upon the residue is to 
turn it into fat (since fat also is one of the residues, 
a healthy one, because it results from good living). 
Some living things actually produce no semen at 
all: examples are the willow and the poplar. Both 
reasons together are responsible for this state of 
affairs ; in other words, on account of their weakness 
the trees cannot concoct their nourishment, and on 
account of their strength they use it all up, as 
described above. Similarly, some animals are pro- 
lific.and have abundance of semen because they are 
_ strong, but others because they are weak ; the ex- 
planation being that in the latter case much useless 
residue gets mixed up with the semen, and in some 
instances, when there is no clear way open by which 
the evacuated matter may leave, it actually produces 
disease, from which some recoyer though others 
succumb. Their semen is contaminated by the col- 
liquescences which get into it, just as they do into 
the urine—another malady by no means unknown. 
“{Further, the same passage serves both for the 
residue and for the semen : (a) in those animals which 

b 29 ff.); the latter part refers to the subjects discussed in 
725 a—726 a. 

* 87 

; ARISTOTLE 
726 a 
Twa, Kal Tis dypas Kal Tis Enpas Tpopiis, mep 
7 Tod vbypod, ravrn Kat u] THs yovas: yiyverat 
dix puots (bypob yap TEpliTTwWELG | eorwy" a yap 
20 Tpopn mayrony vypa HaMov) ols be pen eat avr, 
KaTa THY THS Enpas v dmoardaews aTroxwpynow. Tt 
7) pev avvTntts det voowdys, ) Sé Tod mepiTTH- 
patos adaipecis w@péAysos: 4 S€ TOG améppatos 
amoxaprois apupotépwr' Sia To tmpoohauBdvew 
THs [1 XpnetjLou Tpodis. et 5€ y Hy avvrngis, 
25 Gael éPranrev a av: vov 8 ob Trove TooTo.| 
“Ore pev obdv mepirrapd €oTl TO onépia Xen 
oipou Tpogijs Kal vhs eoxdrns, cize TmavTa mMpoleTat 
oméppua eire ur, ev Tols mpoeepynpyevors havepdv. © 
XIX Mera d€ ratra diopiotéov mepitTwud TE ToOLas 
30 Tpodys, Kal TEpi KaTapnviwr: yiyverar' yap Tot 
KaTapynvia Tov Cwordkwv. Sia TovTwY ‘yap 
vepov €orat Kal mepl Tob OxAcos, TOTEpov mpoteTat 
omTépua Womep TO appev Kal e€oTw Ev" piypa TO 
ywopevov ek dvoiv omepudtow, 7 ovlev onépya 
amoxpiverar amo Tob Ojdeos: Kat et pynOev, moTEpov 
35 ode aAAo odfev ovpPdderau eis T2V yeveow adda 
726 b pdvov mapexet TOTrov, 7 ovpBadrerat Tt, Kal TOOTO 
mT@s Kat tive “tpomov. 
"Ore pév obv éotly éeaoydtn Tpodr TO aipa rots 
* haee non sana ; Aldus habet del voowdns, %) de Tob omép- 

Haros dmoxwpnats epeNiue0s dia 70. mpocAapB. «7A, 
2 & om. PZX. 

@ See P.A. 650 a 34, 651.a 15, 678 a 8 ff.; it has been 
implied throughout the discussion in the preceding chapter 
(ch. 18). 

88 : 

i i i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvimt.—xrx. 

_ produce residue both from the fluid nourishment and 
_ from the solid, the semen is discharged. by the same 
_ exit as the fluid residue, because it is itself a residue 
_ from a fluid, the nourishment of all animals tending 
to be fluid rather than solid; (6) in those animals 
which produce no fluid residue, the semen leaves by 
the same way as the solid excrement. Further, 
colliqueseence is always morbid, whereas the removal 
of residue is beneficial ; and the discharge of semen 
has both characteristics because it includes some of 
the useless nourishment. If it were just a colliques- 
cence, it would always be injurious, whereas in fact 
it is not so.] 

To conclude : the foregoing discussion makes it 
clear that, whether all animals discharge semen. or 
not, semen is a residue derived from useful nourish- 
ment, and not only that, but from useful nourishment 
in its final form. 

Our next task is to determine what is the character XIX 
of the nourishment from which this residue is derived ; erecta 
and we must discuss the menstrual discharge as well, “~"""*” 
because this occurs in some of the Vivipara. By this 
means we shall be able to give a clear answer to 
the following questions : Does the female discharge 
semen as the male does, which would mean that the 
object formed is a single mixture produced from 
two semens ; or is there no discharge of semen from 
_the female? And if there is none, then does the 
_ female contribute nothing whatever to generation, 
merely providing a place where generation may 
_ happen ; or does it contribute something else, and if 
so, how and in what manner does it do so ? 

We have~ said before * that in blooded animals 
blood is the final form of the nourishment, and in 

89 

ARISTOTLE “OITAAAMEY 
726 b os i aa oak acai ea 
evaipots, Tois 8 davaipows 7d avdAoyov, eipnrat 
mporepov’ emel dé Kat 7 your mepirrepid core 
Tpopas Kal THs eoxdarns, qrou ofa ay ety i) 0 
5 dvddoyov 7) €k ToUTwY TL. e€met 8” EK TOD aiwaros 
TETTOLEVOU. Kal peprlopevon Tas ylveras Tov 
popiwy éxaorov, TO be oreppa. mepbev pev aa 
Aowdrepov amokpiverat Tod aiwaros, amenrov 3° 
dv, Kal 6Tav TIS mpooPidlnrat mAeovais Xpdjtevos 
TO dppodiordLew, eviows aipar@des 7 mpoehy- 
10 Avdev, Pavepor, 6 OTL TAS. atparucis dy <in TepitTHpa 
Tpophs TO onepua, Ths «ls Ta Hepn dvadidopevns 
Tehevraias. Kat dia TofiTo peyddny :€ exet Sdvapuy— 
Kal yap 7 Tod Kabapod Kai byvewod alparos aro- 
Xophors exAvtikov—kal TO ope. ylyveoBan TO. 
éxyova Tots yevvnoacw evAoyov" O[LOLOV yep. 70 
15 mpoaeGov Tpos Ta pepn TO drroheuphevru, Ware 
TO oméppa €oTl TO THS YELpOs 7H TO TOO mpoowrov 
} GAov tod Casov adiopiatws yelp 7 mpdcwmor 7 
SAov EGov Kai olov éxetvwv Exacrov evepyeia, 
ToLovrov TO o7réppa, Svvdpet, 7) KATA TOV OyKOV TOV 
Eavtod, } exer’ Tivd Svvapuv ev eavT@ (TovTO yap 
20 obtw SHAov jpiv ex Trav Suvpiopéevwv, TOTEpov TO 
1 éyov A.-W. 

4 

@ See Introd. § 18. > Cf. P.A. 678 a8 . 

° Dynamis : see below, b 19. 

4 And concocted into semen. Cf. also 725'a 25 ff. 

e Introd. § 36. 

¥ See Introd. §§ 26 ff. This is an im rtant. passage for 
the meaning of dynamis in this particular connexion, Cf, 
727 b 14, and ch. 21. 

90 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xr. 

bloodless animals _ the .analogous. substance. . And 
since semen also is a residue from nourishment—from 
sowrelapest its final form, surely it follows that 
semen either blood or the analogous substance, 
or something formed out of these. Now every one 
of the parts * is formed out of the blood as it becomes 
concocted and in some way divided up into portions ; * 
and though semen which has been concocted is by © 
the time of its secretion from it considerably different 
in character from blood, yet unconcocted semen, and 
semen emitted» under strain due to excessively 
frequent intercourse, has been known in some cases 
to have a bloodlike appearance when discharged ; 
and this shows that semen is pretty certainly a residue 
from that nourishment which is in the form of blood 
and which,:as being the final form of nourishment, is 
distributed to.the various parts of the body.? This, 
of course, is the reason why semen has great potency ° 
—the loss of it from the system is just as exhausting 
as the loss of pure healthy blood—and this, too, is 
why we should expect children to resemble their 
parents : because there is a resemblance between 
that which is distributed to the various parts of the 
body and that which is left over.? Thus, the semen 
of the hand or of the face or of the whole animal really 
is hand or face or a whole animal though in. an un- 
differentiated. way ; in other words, what each of 
those ‘is in actuality; such the semen is potentially,’ 
whether in respect of its own proper bulk, or because 
it has some dynamis 4 within itself (I mention both 
alternatives because from what we have said so far 
it is not clear which is the correct one,’ t.e., whether 

9 This will be settled seam; the remaining part of the 
Book ; see especially ch 
91 

726 b 

30 mept ev TovTwY Steupiobes TOV TpOTrOV, Totton: |) 

ARISTOTLE 

oda TOO onepparrés €ort 70 altiov THs ideo 
exer Twa eb Kal apy7v Kuoears “yervyrucy)* 
ovoe yap, 4 xelp 00d dAdo TeV popicy oddey a avev 
yuxiis" nH addns. TwWds Sumdpiedis: €a7e xelp ned 
pdptov obbév, aAXa ‘povov Opmeovupov. He 

25 ‘[Pavepor’ d€ Kal Tt daots aprngis yiverat we . 

| 
paTiKyn, Kal TodTO TEPTTOUG, €oTW. coupe Jalven 
d€ ToUTO. 6Tav avaddnrar els TO mpocdder,? aoTrep 
érav anoméon To evarerpbev* rob Kovidwaros edOds* . 
TavTOV yap €ort 76 ameMov 7H mpdtw mpoo- 
teDevtt. Tov avTov TpOTTOV Kab TO TeAevratoy, me- 
pirrapa TO mpary ovurity part radrév eorw.® rat . 

"Exei 8 dvaykatov Kai T@ dobeveorépw yiyve- 
aba Treptrronpia. mAciov Kal Hrrov TETTE[LLEVOV 5 
TowbvTov © dv avayKatoy elvar atwatwdous bypo-— 
tntos Anos, aabevéotepov dé | 7d €AdTTOVOs 

1 duyixis PSY. 
2 vv. 24-30 secluserunt A.-W., Sus., Platt. © 
3 apocdOor Z, mpocedPov vulg.: in primo disedlottur xy all 
et valde diversa hic: habet. 
* €varoAadbev YZ: confer to mpoceAfov . . . « brodeupOérre 
supra, vv. 14, 15. " 
5 gore) 70 amreADOv') s « radrov éorw| €ort TO pie 
4 

(reAevtaiov om. P) mepirtrwpa TH mpcdbrew mepitTepare PSY. 

* eis. See definition in Met. 1022 b A: oloy evépyerd 71s. 

TOD ExovTos kal exopevov, aomep mpagis TLS 7 Kivqats: orav ye ) 
TO pev movf 7d S€ mrovHrat, Eat. Toinots peratd. — i 
» See Introd. §§ 41 ff. aj es 

¢ Aristotle often repeats this in the Generation of Animals 
and the Parts of Animals; see also Met. 1035 b 24, For 
dpdvupov, cf. Cat. 1 a 1 dpovupa Aéyerar dv dvopa 

92 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xix. 

the physical substance of the semen is the cause of 
generation, or whether it contains some disposition ¢ 
and some principle of movement which effects gen- 
eration), since neither.a hand nor any other part of 
the body whatsoever is a hand or any other part of the 
body if it lacks Soul? or some other dynamis; it has 
the same name,° but that is all.¢ 
_ €{It is clear also that in cases where seminal 
colliquescence occurs, this too is a residue ; and _this 
happens when (a fresh secretion) is decomposed into 
that which preceded it ; just as when a (fresh) layer 
of plaster spread on a wall immediately drops away, 
the reason being that the stuff which comes away is 
identical with that which was applied in the first 
instance. In just the same way, the final residue is 
identical with the original colliquescence. Such then 
are the lines on which we treat that-subject.] 
_ Now (1) the weaker creature too must of neces- 
sity produce a residue, greater in amount and less 
thoroughly concocted ; and (2) this, if such is its 
character, must of necessity be a volume of bloodlike 
fluid.’ (3) That which by nature has a smaller share 
kowdv, 6 S€ Kata Tovvoya Adyos Tis odaias Erepos. In this case, 
the ovcia required to-be present is Soul (see following note, 
and reference to De anima given in note on 738 b 26); but 
itis absent. For cuvdvvpor, see note on 721 a3. 
_ * Because Soul is the essence of any particular body (or of 
any eee of it). Cf. 738 b 26 and note there. 
~-* This von eae seems to be a continuation of the pre- 

interpolation, 726 a 25. There are variations in the 
: Thus, the mss. PSY replace “stuff which ... 
colliquescence ” by “final residue is the same as the first 
residue.”” Some of the words seem to echo lines 14 and 15 
above. 
* Semen of course has undergone a further stage of con- 
ion, and has lost its bloodlike appearance, 

93 

726 b 

727 a 

35 ToLoDTOV Eelpyrat mporepov, avaykatov Kal’ ry ev 

5 eipn Tat, onpeta TO. ovpBaivovra mepl abrd. Kara 

10 yervav, tats 8é Ta Korapeyve. -éru 8€ Kal Ta 

15 pous yiyvovtar ai Kabdpoes ws peOvoraperns” eis 

20 eAdrrous elvat TOV CWUATWV Tots Oijrcow 7 1 TOU 

ARISTOTLE ITAA AGO 
Oeppdrnros Kowevody Kara gvow, 70 8 OAD. bre 

TO O7ew yevopevny aiparesdn dardkepiow mrepir- 
Twa evar. yiverau de rowavrn 9 TOV Kadovpeveor 
Karapnvioy EKKPLOLS. > 10. noe otapl Jt ¥ Yhod 

"Ort peev ovv €oTl Ta Karapojvea mepirTapia, Kat 
Ort dvdAoyov ws tois appeow: 1 youn) ouUTw Tots 
Oijreor TO. Karapnvd, pavepov. déte 8 dp0ds 

yap 77)V adriy WAuciay Tots ev dppeow dp: eral 
eyyiveoBau youn Kal diroxpiverau, trois Sé 6 pai. 
payverat Td. Karapvea Kal perry, TE peraBdn 

Kal emuonpaiver Ta TEpt TOUS pagrovs. Kal, rav~ 
eTau Tijs HAuKkias Aqyovons Tois peeve TO) bvvacbau 

ToLdde onpeta Ort mepirroyd cor adn ay ex 
Kptots Tots OijAcow, ws yap em To OND ov0? 
aipoppotdes yivovrat tals yovativ obr” ek Tay 
purav puous aiparos ore Tu aAXo 27) TOV Karan 
pnviwy torapevwv: éeav te ovpBH Te TovTwY, xeEl- 

Tatra tis amoKpicews, ere Se ovTeE pArcBebd 
opoiws yAaduparrepa Te kal AewdTepa Ta Orie a 
TOV dppevov €oTt dia TO ovvercpiverbar Thy €ls 
TabrTa TepitTwoW ev Tots Karapmviors. 76 8 abrd 
tooTo Set vopiter atriov elvac Kal Tob TOS’ OyKon 15 

dppeow ev tots Cwotoxodew' ev Tovrows yap 7 
eiorapévns PZ: dvadtcxopévns vulg.” 

5 preps, Peck, dAcBwdas vulg. 8 drpiydrepa Z. 
04 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IL. xix. 

of heat is weaker ; and (4) the female answers to this 
description, as we have said already. From which 
we conclude that the bloodlike secretion which occurs 
in the female must of necessity be a residue just as 
much (as the secretion in the male). Of such a. 
character is the discharge of what is called the men- 
strual fluid. — i 
- Thus much then is evident : the menstrual fluid is 
a residue, and it is the analogous thing in females to 
the semen in males. Its behaviour shows that this 
statement is correct. At the same time of life that 
semen begins to appear in males and is emitted, the 
menstrual discharge begins to flow in females, their 
voice changes and their breasts begin to become 
conspicuous ; and similarly, in the decline of life the 
power to generate ceases in males and the menstrual 
discharge ceases in females. Here are still further 
indications that this secretion which females produce 
is a residue. Speaking generally, unless the men- 
strual discharge is suspended, women are not troubled 
by haemorrhoids or bleeding from the nose or any 
other such discharge, and if it happens that they are, 
then the evacuations fall off in quantity, which sug- 
gests that the substance secreted is being drawn off 
to the other discharges. Again, their blood-vessels 
are not so prominent as those of males ; and females 
are more neatly made* and smoother than males, 
because the residue which goes to produce those 
characteristics in males is in females discharged 
together with the menstrual fluid. We are bound to 
hold, in addition, that for the same cause the bulk of 
the body in female Vivipara is smaller than that of 
the males, as of course it is only in Vivipara that the 

4 Also implying “ hairless,” “ delicate,” ‘ dainty.” 
95 

“I; ARISTOTLE TAS IAT 

sian Trav KaTrapynvicoy yiverau puous Ovpale prdvots, Kat 

Toure emdnAdrara ev rats yovagiv> | mActorny 

yap adinow dm K pow yor" TOV pur. ~ 8udzrEp 

emdyrordrws det expov Té eort Kat “BB dbdAeBor, 

25 kal THVv €AAeubiv mpos Tods dppevas EXEL TOO ot) 
paros pavepdy. 

‘Erret be Toor” €oTlw 6 yiyverat Tots Ofrcoud' a as 
7 yorn Tots appeowy, So ouK evdexerar omep- 
parucas dpa yiveoba daroKpicets, davepoy ore 78 
OnAv ov ovpBaderar oméppa ets Ty yeveow. a 
pev yap O7ré ppc. HV; KaTapnven’ ovK dv iv: vov 

30 dé dua TO TabTa yiyveoOas éxeivo odK CoTW. 

_ Acért pev ovr, | Gomep TO oTrépua, Kal Ta kara- 
perjvea. mepirrapd cory, etpy Tau AdBou 8 ay Tus 
eis TobTo flapripia evi TOv ovpBawovrev ois” 
Cesous. Ta TE yap mova Hrrov éort omreppariKa 
Tov darypeduy, @omep elpnta mpdtepov. atrvov 

35 3 ore Kal 1) med) TepirTwpa €oTe’ xabdarep TO 
o7repyia, Kal TETTELEVOV afya, GAN’ od Tov abrov 
TpoTov TD OTepware. wor evo yus eis THY Tr 

727 b pedry dum Awperns THs TEpiTTwBEWS eMetzret Ta 
mepl THY yovnv, olov Tov Te avaipeoy Ta. paAdxua 
kal Ta HadacdoTpasa mept THY Know eorw apt- 
ora. Sud TO dvayia, yap «lvat Kal aa) yivecbas 

5 muyLedry € ev abrois, TO dvddoyov avrois TH myrehy 
dmoxpiverat eis 70 TepirT@pa 70 oTrepparucoy. 
onpetov 8° ore od ToLwdvTo omreppa aTpoteTat 70 
OAAv ofov TO dppev, obde [vyvupevay dpupotv yi- 
VeTal, WOTTEP Tweés gaow, 6Tt TroAAaKes 70 OAndv 
ovAapBdver od yevonéevns adri ris ev TH opdia 

1 xatrapyva P: 7a Karapyva vulg. 
2 trois dAAos PZ. 3 727 a 31-b 6 seel. Sus. 

96 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. x:x. 

_ menstrual discharge flows externally, and most con- 
_ spicuously of all in women, who discharge a greater 
- amount than any other female animals. On this 
_ account it is always very noticeable that the female 
is pale, and the blood-yessels are not prominent, and 
there is an obvious deficiency in physique as compared 
_ with males. | 

Now it is impossible that any creature,should pro- 
duce two, seminal secretions at once, and as the 
secretion in females which answers to semen in males 
is the menstrual fluid, it obviously follows that the 
female does not contribute any semen to generation ; 
for if there were semen, there would be no menstrual 
fluid ; but as menstrual fluid is in fact formed, there- 
fore there is no semen. 

We have said why it is that the menstrual fluid as 
well as semen is a residue. In support of this, there 
are a number of facts concerning animals which may 
be adduced. (1) Fat animals produce less semen 
than lean ones, as we said before, and the reason is 
that fat is a residue just as semen is, .e., it is blood 
that has been concocted, only not in the same way as 
semen. Hence it is not surprising that when the 
residue has been consumed to make fat the semen is 
deficient. Take a parallel from the bloodless animals : 
Cephalopods and Crustacea are in their finest con- 
dition at the breeding season. Why? Because, 
being bloodless, they produce no fat ; hence, what in 
_ them corresponds to fat is at this period secreted 
into the seminal residue. (2) Here is an indication 
that the female does not discharge semen of the same 
kind as the male, and that the offspring is not formed 
from a mixture of two semens, as some allege. Very 
often the female conceives although she has derived 

E 97 

727 b 

ARISTOTLE) (T/A AR VO 

ndovijs* Kal yuyvouevns mdAw obdev Arrov, Kal 
10 vibe ae [mapa]? Tob appevos Kal 708 7jAeos, 
ov yevrG,: €av 1) Bu) TOV Kadovpevenv Karapnvia 
ixpas dmdpxn OMpETpOS. Sid ovte Gdws 1) 
YUyvopLeven adtay yeuvg 70 OfAv, ove yuyvopevany 
orav e€ixpaln ws emt 7d modd¥, GAAa peta TIV 
KdBapow. dre pev yap odk exec tpodiy odd’ 
15 vAnv e€ Fs Suvicerar cvorioa to C@ov 7 amo 
Tod dppevos evuTTdpxovoa ev TH yovh Svvapis, dre 
dé ouvexxAvlerar dia TO AROS. Otay dé yevo- 
pévwv aérOn, 76 dbrodedbev cuvicrata. sdoat 
dé 2) yeyvopevanv TOV Karapnviay avd ap Ba- 
vovow, 7 peerage yeyvopeveny dorepov § dé py}, atrvov 
20 OTe Tais ev TooavTn yiverat ixpas 6 don peTa Thy 
Kdbapow db7oAcimetas Tats yovijous, mAciwv 8 ov 
ylyverat tepitrwois wote Kat Odpale azedbetv, 
tais 6€ peta THY. Kdbapow cupper TO oTdua TOV 
dorepSv. dtrav obv moAd pev TO ameAndAvbos 7, 
ert 5é ylyynrar pev Kabapors, 7) Tooadryn Sé Hore 
25 ovvetixudlew*® To oréeppa, Tore TANoLalovoa avA- 
AapBdvovar madw.* ovdev dé dromov ro avvetdAn- 
dvias ért ylyvecbar Kal yap vorepov péxpt Twos 
poira Ta KaTapnvia, ddAiya dé Kat od dude Tae 
4 seclusit Platt: ro mapa Z. 
2 yee A.-W.: yiyverar vulg.: yiyverar <ovAAnyis> Bef. 

3 guveétxudlew Z : ebucudlew vulg. 
4 zadtw om. PS. 

@ See above, 726 b 19. 

’ This really means ordinary individuals in which the — 

menstrual discharge takes place. 

98 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xix. 

no pleasure from the act of coitus ; and, on the con- 
trary side, when the female derives as much pleasure 
as the male, and they both keep the same pace, the 
female does not bear—unless there is a proper amount 
of menstrual liquid (as it is called) present. Thus, 
the female does not bear (a) if the menstrual fluid is 
completely absent, (6) if it is present and the dis- 
charge of moisture is in progress (in most instances) ; 
but only (c) after the evacuation is over. The reason 
is that in one case (a) the female has no nourishment, 
no material, for the dynamis* supplied by the male 
in the semen to draw upon and so to cause the living 
creature to take shape from it; in the other case 
(6) it is washed right away owing to the volume of 
the menstrual fluid: When, however, (c) the dis- 
charge is over and most of it has passed off, then what 
remains begins to take shape as a fetus. There are 
instances of women who conceive without the 
occurrence of menstrual discharge ; others conceive 
during its occurrence but not after it. The reasons 
are these. The former produce only just so much 

liquid as remains in fertile individuals ® after the 
* evacuation is over, and there is no surplus residue to 
be dischargéd externally ; in the latter, the mouth 
of the uterus closes up after the evacuation is over. 

Therefore, when there has been a plentiful discharge 
- and yet the evacuation still continues, though not so 
copiously that the discharge of moisture carries the 
semen away with it, that is the time when if they 
have intercourse women can conceive again. There 
is nothing odd about the menstrual fluid’s continuing 
to flow after conception has taken place ; indeed it 
actually recurs afterwards up to a point, but it is 
scanty and does not last throughout gestation. How- 

99 

727 b 

728 a 

ARISTOTLE | (avs 

aAAd tobro ev voonparades, Sudzrep ohtyaus Kat 
dAvyaKis oupBaiver: Ta 8 ws emt ro word yovdpeva 
30 paAvora Kara, pvow €oriv. 

“Ort pev ody ovpPddAcrat 70 OAXdv eis Tih ye- 
veow Thy dhny, Tobro & éoriv év TH TOV KaTa- 
pnvioy avotace, Ta d€ Karapjvia repirrwya, 
d7jAov. 

XX No olovrat TWES oTrepia. ovpBadrcobae ev 
35 TH cvvovoig 7d OAAu Sud TO ywerbae TapamAn- 
oiay Te xapav eviore avrais Th tev _dppevev Kal 
apa, bypav doKpiow, ovK €oTW 7, dypacta atrn 
oTrEppLaTuct) dAAa Tob Témov ios € éxdorats. €oTe 
yap T@v toTep@v ExKkpiois, Kal Tails pev ylyverat 
Tais 5 ov. ylyverau pev yap’ Tats AeuKoxpdots Kal 
OndrvKais ws emi TO TOAD eizetv, od yiverar dé Tals 
peAaivas Kal appevwrots. to dé TADS, ais yi- 

5 yverar, eviore od KaTAa oTéppuaTos TpdEeciv éeoTwW, 
GAAG 70Ad brepBadrAc. Eri d€ Kal ed€opata erepa 

1 yap SZ: om. vulg. 

« Aristotle’s notion that the menstrual blood is the sub- 
stance from which the embryo is formed? reigned un- 
questioned for many centuries. (It appears in the Wisdom 
of Solomon, vii. 2, “‘ In the womb of a mother was I moulded 
into flesh in the time of ten months, being compacted in 
blood of the seed of man and the pleasure that came with 
sleep.) It can be seen pictured in 16th century obstetrical 
books such as the De conceptu et generatione hominis of 
Jacob Rueff (1554). Its falsity was decisively demonstrated 
by William Harvey, who in his Hxercitationes de generatione 
animalium (1651) describes his dissections of the uteri of 
does in King Charles the First’s forests, at different stages 
after coitus. The expected mass of blood and seed was 
never found; a source of great perplexity to Haryey himself, 
since the mammalian egg was not discovered until ; Mags after 

100 

— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xrx.—xx. 

ever, this is a morbid condition, and that is why it 
only occurs infrequently and in few subjects. It is 
what occurs generally that, is most in accord with 
the course of Nature. 

By now it is plain that the contribution which the 
female makes to generation is the matter used therein, 
that this is to be found in the substance constituting 
the menstrual fluid,* and finally that the menstrual 
fluid is a residue, 

There are some who think that the female con- XX 

tributes semen ® during coition because women some- 
times derive pleasure from it comparable to that of 
the male and also produce a fluid secretion: This 
fluid, however, is not seminal ; it is peculiar to the 
part from which it comes in each several individual ; 
there is a discharge from the uterus, which though 
it happens in some women does not in others. Speak- 
ing generally, this happens in fair-skinned women @ 
who are typically feminine, and not in dark women 
of a masculine appearance. Where it occurs, this 
discharge is sometimes on quite a different scale from 
the semen discharged by the male, and greatly ex- 
ceeds it in bulk. Furthermore, differences of food 

his death. We know now that the menstrual bleeding is a 
phase in the sexual cycle, this phase being usually succeeded 
by the periodica] liberation of the egg from the ovary, and 
by its attachment (if fertilized) to the wall of the uterus. 

> The view that the female also contributed semen was 
apparently adopted by the Epicureans; see Lucretius 
iv. 1229 semper enim partus duplici de semine constat; 
of. 1247, 1257-1258. 

¢ This apparently refers to the so-called vaginal discharge, 
which is a natural secretion (cf. 739 a 37); but the latter 
sg of the paragraph seems to describe leucorrhoea, which 

is pathological. The two have apparently been confused. 

Cf. H.A. 583 a 11. 

101 

728 a 

ARISTOTLE OVA SVMS 

érepwy moved ToAAjy © “Stapopav Too viyveodau: TV 
ExKplow ) eAdtrw 7 TAciw Ti Tourn, olov 
évia TOV Spysewy emidSnAov Trove ets aAiOos ry 
amToKpiow. 

10 To dé oupBaivew Borin ¢ €v Th ouvovala. ob ydvov 
TOO omépuatos mpoieevov eotiv, adAa Kat mvev- 
jearos, e€ ob ovvearapevou anmoomepparilet. sian 
S emt tOv maidwv TOV paren Suvapieveny | mpoteoOar 
eyyds S€ THs MArkias ovrey, Kal tov aydv 
dvdpav: yiveTau yap maou Tovrous 7iBov7) Eide 

15 Kal Tois ye Suehlappevors THY yéveow €oTw ore 
avadtovras at KotAiar dua TO amoKpivecbar mepit- 
TwWELA Els THY KotAiav od Suvdpevov agg Kal 
yeverbar o7épya. ny 

"Eouce 5€ Kal 77 _ Hopgiy yuvarkt’ mats, ai 
€oTw i yuv7) aomep dppev. ayovoy: ddvvapia yap 
TWt TO OAAv €oTl, TO ‘al ddvacbar mérTew. €K Tis 

20 Tpodiis onéppa tis tordrns (tobro 8 €otw 7 
alfa i TO avdAoyov ev Tots dvaipots) dia ibvypornra. 
ris dvcews. Warep obv ev rais KotAlats did THY 

a \ 9 
dzrepiay yiveTau Sudppowa, oUTws ev Tais Preypiv at 

¢ 

7 aAAau aipoppoides Kal uv TOV Karapinvicy prors* 

Kal. yap arn: aiwoppois €otw, GAN’ éxeivou ani dud 
25 vooov, avTy de PvOLKT). 
“Qote Pavepov 6 OTe evidyws yiverat eK rovrou 7 
yéveois. €oTt yap Ta KaTapHvia oTeppa OB Ka- 
‘ > ‘ , > , ¢ y “A lan A 
Bapov adda Sedpuevov epyacias, wamep ev TH TEpt 
1 yovaxt Z: yor) Kol vulg. é 
2 4 Tay K. pvows Y: af Tav K. vulg. 

102 

ae 

a om TT 

L GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

cause a t difference in the amount of this dis- 
charge tia is produced : ¢.g.,some pungent foods 
Sates a noticeable increase in the amount. 
_ The pleasure which accompanies copulation is due 
_ to the fact that not only semen but also preuma * is 
_ emitted : it is from this pneuma as it collects together 
_ that the emission of the semen results. This is plain 
in the case of boys who cannot yet emit semen, 
_ though they are not far from the age for it, and in 
_ infertile men, because all of them derive pleasure 
from attrition. Indeed, men whose generative organs 
have been destroyed sometimes suffer from looseness 
of the bowels caused residue which cannot be 
concocted and converted into semen wt secreted 
into the intestine.- 
Further, a boy actually eieninles a woman: jin 
_ physique, and a woman is as it were an infertile male ; 
the female, in fact, is female on account of inability? 
of a sort, viz, it lacks the power to concoct semen 
out of the final state of the nourishment ‘(this is 
either blood, or its counterpart in bloodless animals) 
because of the coldness of its nature. Thus, just as 
lack of concoction produces in the bowels diarrhoea, 
‘so in the blood-vessels it produces discharges of blood 
of various sorts, and especially the menstrual dis- 
charge (which has to be classed as.a discharge of 
_blood, though it is a natural discharge, and the rest 
_are morbid ones). 
_ Hence, plainly, it is reasonable to hold that genera- 
‘tion takes place from this process ; for, as we see, the 
"menstrual fluid is semen, not. indeed semen in a pure 
‘condition, but needing still.to be acted upon» It 

* See 718 a 4, 738 a 1, etc. 
aD > Cf. 765 b 9: 

103 

ARISTOTLE AM 
728 a 
Tovs KapTrovs yeveoet, OTav a pare Pee 2 
EveoTe [ev 7 Tpodr}, detrau 8” epyacias mpos 7 
30 xdBapow, dio Kal peyvyern exe pev TH yori 
avtn dé Kabapa Tpoh, 7 peev yea, 2) Se TpE pel. 
mpetov de Tob To OAAv pun) mpoteobat OTrepp 
Kal 70 yireobau ev TH opunria TY Bovny. TH agi 
Kara TOV avrov TOTTOV Tots appeow" Katrou ov 
Tpotevrat TH ixpudda, TaUraY evredbev. Te e ov 
35 7Got yivera Tots OjAeow atrn 7 Exxplors, ¢ 
Tots aiarucois, Kal ovoe TovToLS. maow, aan’ dowy 
at dorépae Ha) mpos_ TB broldparé eto BS wo- 
728 b ToKobaw, ere 0 ode Tots atua pa} ‘€xovow Gana 
TO dvdAoyov 6 orrep yap ev €keivois® TO aipa, ev Tov 
Tos €Tépa Umapyet ovyKpLots. Tod be pre Tovrous | 
yiyveobau xdbapow pajre TOV aipa €xovrew Tots : 
etpnpevots, Tois KaTw exovor Kal. 47) WoToKoDaW; 
atria u] Enporns Tov owparov, dhiyor Nefmovea 
TO TepirriwLa., Kal Togobrov Goov «is Thy yéveow 
ieavev _pévov, €Ew Sé 2) mpoteoBat. doa de Leo- 
TOKA avev WoToKias (rabra So cory dvOpewros kat 
Tov rerpanddiv 6 doa Kdparre Ta omiabva oneAn év- 
10 TOS" TavTG. pev yap maura. Lworoxet a aveu @oroxta 
rovrois Sé ylyverar pev maou, my el Te memhpw- 

Or 

1 SinOnuévn Bonitz: Sen7rnpéevn Z, A.-W.: Senrnnevy vulg. : 
cibus hdd imcompletus x cf. indicem Aristot. 9 

2 & exeivois Platt: evios vulg. year ote 

3 toils KaTw . . . woToKodaw om. Z. ; 

* éxrés Z}, Platt: ra éxros Y. ; 

? Cf. Pol. 1281 b 37 y] TH) xabapa Tpody pera THs KaBapas 
THY waaay Trove? xpyownmrépav THs dAtyns.—For the two ce 
Tpopr}, see 744 b 32 ff. Cf. 725 a 17. 

> Of. 739 b 15. . 

° i.e., the extremity of the bent limb is moved towards th 

104 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

is the same with fruit when it is forming... The 
_ nourishment is present right enough,.even before it 
has been strained off, but it stands in need of being 
acted upon in order to purify it. That is why when - 
the former is mixed with the semen, and when the 
latter is mixed with pure nourishment,* the one 
effects generation, and the other effects nutrition. 
An indication that the female emits no semen is 
actually afforded by the fact that in intercourse the 
pleasure is produced in the same place as in the male 
by contact, yet this is not the place from which the 
liquid is emitted.’ Further, this discharge does not 
oceur in: all females, but only in those which are 
blooded, and not in all of them, but only in those 
whose uterus is not close by the diaphragm and which 
are not oviparous ; nor again in those which have an 
analogous .substance. instead of blood (they have 
another composition which is for them what blood is 
for the others). Dryness of the body is the cause why 
neither these animals nor the blooded ones I men- 
tioned (viz., those whose uterus is low down and which 
are not oviparous) produce this evacuation; their 
dryness leaves over but little residue, only enough in 
fact for generation, not enough to be emitted exter- 
nally. Take next the animals which are viviparous 
but not previously oviparous : this means man, and 
those quadrupeds which bend their hind legs in- 
wards.° The menstrual discharge occurs in all of 
_ these ; though if they are deformed 4 in any respect 
main bulk of the body and not away from it, so that the 
_ angle of the bent joint points away from the body. “In- 
_ wards” thus has no reference to ““knock knees.” See J.A. 
704 a 19 ff., 711 a 8 ff.; H.A. 498 a 3 ff. ; and my diagram 

in Parts of Animals (Loeb), p. 433. 
4 See Introd: § 12. 

105 

ARISTOTEE | PAs 440 
728 b > ~ / > 4 a Rs 3.5 : 
TAL Ev TH yeveoet, olov dpeds, od piv emumoAdlovat 
ye at Kabdpoes worep avOpdrros. Sv akpiBelas 
dé, mds ovpBaiver Tadra Tept €kacTov Tdav CHwv, 
yéypanras ev tais rept ra Ca ioropiaus. mAelorn 
15 € yiverat Kdbapois TOv Coswv tats yuvarti, Kat 
Tois appear TmAcioTn Tob oméppatos mpdeos KaTa 
Adyov Tod peyeBovs. aitwv 8’ 4 Tob awparos 
avoracis vypa Kal Jeput) odca: dvayKaiov yap €v 
T@ ToLOvTw yivecOa TAEcioTHY TEpitTwow. Ere Be 
ovde Ta ToLabr exer ev TO cwpare pepyn cis a 
20 TpETMETAL 1. TEpitTwWOLS, WomEp ev Tots GAAois* Od 
yap €xet ovTe Tpiydv TAHOos Kara TO GGpa, ovre 
ooT@v Kal Kepdtwv Kal oddvTwY exKpioeis. 9) ~ 
Lnpetov 8 Gru ev rots KaTapnviors 7d o7épya 
€oriv' dua yap, worep eipnrar mporepov, Tots ap- 
peau yiverat TO Treplrrwpa TotTo Kat rots OjXect 
257 KaTapHvia emonpaiver ev TH adTH wHAukia,’ ds 
Kal dpa duoTapévwy tov témav Tov SexTiK@v 
éxarépov Tod TepiTtT@patos: Kat , dparoupevwy 
exatépwv T&v mAnciov Torwv eavbel 4 TAS HBys 
tpixwots. peAAdvrwy dé diulctacbar of TOmoL ayv- 
ovdovaw b70 TOU mvEevpaTos, TOIs ev Appeow emt- 
dyAdTepov epi Tovs Opyeis, emLonpaiver’ Se Kai 
30 TEpt tovs paatovs, Tois dé OyAcou mepi Tods pa- 
atovs padAdov-, 6tav yap Svo daktuAovs: apbaat, 
TOTE yiveTaL TA KaTapHVvia' Tats mAEioTais.* 9» 
"Ev 6 ev ovv TOv Cwny exdvrTwy' jit) KEe- 

v ogols [Lev OVV TWY CWIV EX py) 
xwptorae TO OFAU Kali. Td, dppev, TovToLs) ev TO 
ahrme 

1 yy. 22-32 secl. Sus.0n zed) atin? abies 

@ See Book II, ch. 8. LAL 819 b 99 fF: 
106 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

in their formation, as, e.g., the mule,* the evacuation 
is not as obvious as it is in human beings. An exact 
account of this matter, as it concerns every sort of 
animal, is to be found in the Researches upon Animals.” 
A larger amount of evacuation is produced by women 
than by any other animal, and a larger amount of 
semen in proportion to their size is emitted by men ; 
the_reason being that the composition of the human 
body is fluid and warm, and that is just the sort of 
erganism which of necessity produces the greatest 
amount of residue ; further, the human body does 
not possess the sort of parts to which the residue gets 
diverted, as other animals-do: it has no great coat 
of hair all over the body,° and no secretions in the 
form of bones, horns and tusks. 

' Here is an indication that the semen resides in the 
menstrual discharge. As I said before, this residue 
is formed in males at the same time of life as the 
menstrual discharge becomes noticeable in females ; 
which suggests that the places which are the recep- 
tacles of these residues also become differentiated at 
the same time in each sex ;_ and as the neighbouring 
places in each sex become less firm in their con- 
sistency, the pubic hair grows up too. Just before 
these places receive their differentiation, they are 
swelled up by the pneuma: in males, this is clearer 
in regard to the testes, but it is also to be noticed in 
the breasts ; whereas in females it is clearer in the 
breasts: it is when the breasts have risen a couple 
fof fingers’ breadth that the menstrual discharge 
begins in most women. 

Now in those living creatures where male and 
female are not separate, the semen (seed) is as it 

© Or, in proportion 'to the size of the body. 

107 

728 b 

729 a 

ARISTOTLE)! 1? ff AAD 

o7répj.at olov Kednpd corw. eyo be. Kono TO 
35 mp@rov jetypia” OnjAeos” Kal dppevos. Bud Kal. €& 
évos _oTrépparos ev oda yiverar, ofov’ e€?  évos 
mupod els mb ui, womep Ge €vds @od ev Cov (ra 
yap didvupa TOV wOv do od cori). év daots be 
Tov yevOv Sidsprorat 76 OfAv Kai 76 hs ev rov- 
TOUS ag’ €vos oT epyaros. EvoexXETAL 70 yiveoBa 
ta, ws Svadépovros Th pvoe Too ome pa TOS ev 
Tots utois TE Kal Seo, onpetov dé, and as 
5 yap dxelas mela yiverat ev Tots Theiw _ Suvapevors 
yevvay eves. a Kal dijrov 67u ovK dd ; mavTos” 
epxerau y) you" ovTE yap dy KEXWpLOpevaL amo Tob 
avdrod Hépous evOds arexpivero, ovre apa. eAbovra 
ets Tas voTépas exe? Seywpileror dAAa oupBaiver 
10 Wo7rep evAoyov, ered) TO pLev dppev mrapéxerat TO 
Te eldos Kat Thy apxynyv Tis KUMEWS, To b€ OAAv 
TO odpa Kal wi ohny, ofov ev TH 708 ydAaKros 
meu TO jeev copa TO yaa eorty, 6 3 omds 7H 7" 
mutta, TO THY apy eXov THY ovvioTaoay, ovT@ 
TO amo rob appevos ev TH Ore pepelopevor. 8C 
15 iy 8 airiav pepilerau e0a pev eis Trcion 0a & 

aie 

eis €Adtrw évba S€ povaxdas, ETEpOS €oTat diese 
GAAd Sua 76 pnblev ye diaddpew ro elder, GAN’ edv ed 

1 é« add. PSY; om, vulg., Z*. s et YZ*, oo vulg 
SevZ: ev 8¢ vulg..: év 8) Y. GST 
4 4 Platt, Btf. : 3 Lai 4 vulg. lang Sat 

@ See Introd. §§ 56 ff. > Cf..123 b 10, 198 agt 

¢ Cf. above, 722 'b'28, 723 b 14. i 

4 The ‘ Formal” Cause, and the “‘ Motive” ( 
if Efficient ’ * Cause, i.é., sentient Soul, 

¢ The “ Material’ Cause... See Introd. Sl f,. With thi 
passage cf. Met. 1044 a 34 avOpeirou ris aitia ws wh pat 
katapnvia;\7i 8 ds Kwodv; dpa To o7éppa; , 

108 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, lI. xx. 

“were a fetation.* (By fetation I mean the, primary 
“mixture. of male and female.) This explains inci- 
dentally why one body only is formed from one 
‘seed—e. g., one stalk from one grain of corn, just 
like one animal from one egg (double-yolked eggs of 
course count as two eggs). In those groups, however, 
where male and female are distinct, many animals 
may be formed from one semen, which suggests that 
the nature of semen in animals differs from that in 
plants.’ We have as a proof of this those animals 
which are able to produce more offspring than one at 
a time, where more than one are formed as the result 
of one act of coitus. This shows also that the semen 
is not drawn from the whole body; because we 
eannot suppose (a) that at the moment of discharge’ 
it contains a number of separate portions from one 
and the same part of the body ; nor (6) that these 
Bertions all enter the uterus dogether and separate 

emselves out when they have got there.‘ No; 
what happens is what one would expect to happen. 
The male provides the “ form” and the “ principle 
of the movement,” ? the female provides the body, 
in other words, the material.¢ Compare the coagula- 
tion of milk. Here, the milk is the body, and the 
fig-juice or the rennet contains the principle which 
causes it to set.’ The semen of the male acts in the 
same way as it gets divided up into portions within 
the female. (Another part of the. treatise? will 
explain the Cause why in some cases it gets divided 
into many portions; in others into few, while in others 
it is not divided up at all.) But as this semen which 
gets divided up exhibits no difference in kind, all that 

f Of. 739 b 23. 
¢77i1b 14 ff. 

109 

ARISTOTLENTASHKO | 
729 a ‘Wes. 
povov ovppeTpov 7h’ To Svarpoujrevov mpos THY vANV, 
Kal _ Majre édarrov aore pn mértew pnde ovv- 
voTdvat, pajre mAeiov wore &npavar, mAciad ovTW 
20 yervarat. ex 8¢ rob ovviaTavros ‘Tpostov, ef sit 
non ev yiverat [Lovov. 

“Ore pev obv TO OAAv els TIHV yéveow yoviyy ey 
ob oup Barrera, ovpBadrer ar d¢ Tl, Kat Toor” 
eoriy a Tav Karapavicy avoraats Ka TO avar ov 
ev tots avaipous, éx Te TOV elpnuevwy Sidov. kal 
Kara TOV Adyov KxaBorov OKOTOULEVOLS. a | 

25 yap elvae TO yerv@v Kal (ro) e& e€ 0b, Kal Tad 2 ay 
Kat év 7, TO ye eidev Suadepew Kal T@ TOV Adyov 
abtay elva Erepov, ev 8é Tois Kexwpropevas éxover 
Tas Suvdpets Kal Ta Cwpara Kat Ty dvow érépav 
elvan Too Te TrovobvTos Kat Tob TAOXOVTOS. el ovv 
TO dppev eorly ws woody Kat Trowoby, 7 Se OAAv, 

30 oR bAXv,* as TabnriKov, els THY TOU dppevos youn 
TO Ondy a dv avpBdAdoitro od youny aA’ vAny.. Orep 
Kal paiverar oupBaivov: Kara yap THY TpaTny 
BAnv* eotiv 7) TOV KaTapnviwy dvais. 

t <76> Rackham. Ty one 
2 radr7’ Peck: rod7’ vulg. i wel 
sin Bijdv fort. secl. (ex 729 b 12 insertum 2). 

Kava . . . vAnr] } yap mpwrn VAn Z. 
* Cf. 772 a 12. > In one individual. 
° j.¢., specifically, in ‘* form.” 4 See Introd. § 10. 

¢ At Met. 1015 a 8 (cf. 1014 b 27) Aristotle speaks 
of “‘ prime matter ” in two senses: ¢@.g., in the case of bronze 
articles (a) the prime matter relatively to them is bronze, bu 
(b) generally it is water (because all things that can be melted 
according to Aristotle, consist of water). And “ prime 
matter” is one of the meanings of pvous, both according t 
Met. (loc, cit.) and Phys, 193 a 28: “ one meaning of $y 
is 7 mpwrn éxdoTrw broKxeméevn DAN TaV exdvTwv ev adrois ap 

110 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

is required.in order to produce numerous offspring is 

that there should be the right amount of it to suit i 
4 the material, available—neither so little that it fails 

to concoct it or even to set it, nor so much that it 
dries it'up.* If on the other hand this semen which 
causes) the: original setting remains single and un- 
divided,. ‘then one single offspring, (only is formed 
from it. 

The foregoing discussion will’ bave page it clear 
that the female, though it does not contribute any 
semen to generation, yet contributes something, viz., 
the substance’ constituting the menstrual fluid (or the 
corresponding | substance in bloodless animals), But 

e same is apparent if we consider the matter gener- 
ally, from the theoretical standpoint. Thus: there 
must be that which generates, and that out of which 
ppeeerstany and even if these two be united. in 
one,” at any rate they must differ in kind,’ and in: 
that the logos? of each of them is distinct. In those 
animals in which these two faculties are separate, 
the body—that is to say the physical nature—of the 
active partner‘and of the passive must be different. 
Thus, if the male is the active partner, the one which 
ig eens the movement, and the female qua female 

€ passive one, surely what the female contributes 
to the semen of the male will be not ‘semen but 
material. And ‘this is in fact what *we find happen 
ing; forthe natural substance of the menstrual fluid 
is to be classed as‘‘‘ prime matter.’’ ¢ 

€ws Kai weraBoAjs.”” In its lowest phase, “‘ prime matter” 
SA which, united with the prime contrarieties (hot, cold, 
solid, fluid), produces the “elements”? Earth, Air, Fire, 
Water; but, as the term “prime ” itself suggests, ‘* matter ” 
is altogether a relative conception, and in its ‘highest phase 
matter is one and the same as “ form ” (Met. 1045 b 18). 

111 

ARISTOTLE (¢) 049 

729 a : 
xx1I Kai rept pev Tovtwv Suvpicbw Tov agai Too- 

35 Tov. dpa 8 €x rodtwv havepov, Trepl dv eXOnEvOy 
729b = €or emvoxeyiagtat, 7@S TOTE oupBddrerar « els Thy 
yeveow TO appev, Kal THs aitiov €oT. TOD ywo- 
pévov TO OT€ppLa TO amo TOD Appevos, TOTEPOV ws 
evuTrdpyov Kat pdpiov dv ebOds Tod yivopevov aw- 
patos, puyvipevov TH vAn TH mapa Tod OyAeos, 7 
570 pev cpa odfev Kowwvel Tod omépparos, 4 8 
ev ait@ Svvayuis Kal Kivnois: ad7n pev yap €otw 

7 rrowdou, TO dé ovvicrdpevov Kal Aap Bavov Thy 
popdny TO TOU ev TH OjAee TEpUTT@paTOS ‘Aouzrov, 
KaTad Te 51) TOV Ayo ovTw haiveTar Kat emt THY 
épywv. Kaldodrov te yap é€moKxototow od paiverat 
10 yuyvopevov €v €x Tob TabytiKob Kal Tob movobvTos 
ws evuTdpxovTos ev TH ywopéevw Tod ToLodvTos, 
ovo ddAws 87) €K TOO Kiwovpéevov Kal KwWodvTOS. 
GMa py td ye OAAv, H OAAv, taOnTidv, 7d 8 
Gppev,’ 7) appev, mountixov Kal Olev 7 apxt Tis 
kwiocws. ‘wore dv AndbH Ta dxpa Exatépwv, F 
15 TO pev TrountiKov Kal Kwodv, TO d€ mabyTiKOY Kal 
KWOULLEVOV, OUK EaTW Ek TOUTWY TO yLyVOLEVOV. EV, 
GAN’ 7) ovTws ws ex Tot TéKTovos Kai EvAov 7 
Kvn, 7) Os ek Tob KNpod Kal Tod «idous 

4 opaipa. ShAov dpa dtu ovr avayKn amevat Tt 

* Aristotle now comes to grips with deciding yes the 
alternatives stated at 726 b 18 ff. 

> 4.e., that portion of the menstrual fluid) which i is not dis 
charged externally. 

¢ Cf. 116 a 27 ff. 
112 

7 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xxt. 

These then are the lines upon, which that subject it 
should be treated. “And what we have said indicates gencrstion. 
piso Se i time how wwe are to answer the 
: ch we next have to considex, viz., how 
iti is that nay male makes its contribution to genera- 
tion, and how the semen produced by the male is the 
cause of the offspring ; that is to say, Is the semen 
inside the offspring to start with, from the outset a 
_ part of the body which is formed, and mingling with 
_ the material provided by the female ; ; or does the 
_ physical part of the semen have 'no share nor lot in the 
business, only the dynamis and movement contained 
in it? %» This, anyway, is the active and efficient 
ingredient ; whereas the ingredient which: gets set 
_ and given shape is the remnant? of the residue in the 
female animal.. The second suggestion is clearly the 
_ right one, as_is shown both by reasoning and by 
_ observed fact. (a) If we consider the matter on 
} general grounds, we see that when some one thing 
is formed from the conjunction of ‘an active partner 
_ with a passive one, the active partner is not situated 
_ within the thing which is being formed ; and we may 
_ generalize this ‘still further by substituting ““mov- 
‘and “moved” for “active? and “ passive.” 

Now of course the female, gua female,‘ is passive, and 
_ the male, qua male, is active—it is that whence the _ 
principle of movement comes. Taking, then, the 
widest formulation of each of these two opposites, 
'_viz., regarding the male qua active and causing move- 
ment, and the female qua passive and being set in 
_ movement, we see that the one thing which is formed 
__ is formed from them only in the sense in which a bed- 
_ stead is formed from the carpenter and-the wood, or 
_ a ball from the wax and'the form. It is plain, then, 

113 

729 b 

730 a 

ARISTOTLE)! 7/310 4.0 

amo rob dippevos ovr" el Tt amépxerat; Sid robo 
20 €K TovTou ws evuTdpxovTos TO yeyvopevev €or, 
GAN’ as ek Kwi}oayTos Kal TOO €tdous, ds Kal’ dard 
THS tar puns 6 dyvacbets. ovpBalver a Sporoyos- 
peva TQ Aoyw Kal ext trav épywv. Sid todro ya, 
Evia, Trav appévwv Kal ovrdvalopevan Tots Bioe 
ovoe Hopiov odbev patverat mpote eva. cis TO Ov, 
25 dAAd TovvayTiov TO OAjAv els 78 Gppev, 6 ovpBaiver 
eviois TOV eVTOHOV. 6 yap Tots mpolepevors an- 
epyalera TO oméppa ev TO O7jAev, rodTous® 7 €v 
T® CLdw atT@ Depporns® Kal dvvapus dmepyaerat, 
<iahpovtos. Tod OnjAcos TO Sexrucov, Too TEpiTT eo 
patos pdpiov. Kal dud TodTo Ta ToWatTa TeV 
30 Cabwv ovpahéceran pLev aroAdv Xpovors duvadvbévra dé 
yevvd TaXews. ovvdedvacrat prev odv* bEXpis. 08° 
dv ovorion, aorep oT) youn’ diadvbévra dé mpoterar 
To Kina Taxéws* yea yap drehés: oxwdAnxoroKel 
yap TdavrTa Ta ToLadTa, 
Meéeyorov be onpetov TO ovpBaivov Trepl TOUS 
opviblas Ka TO TOV ixQbor yevos TOV poroKay 
35 Tod LTE ao mavrov teva’ TO omeppa TOV jLopiwv, 
LTE mpotecBae TO appev Tovodrov Te HOptov 3 
carat € evuTrd pov T@ yervnbevr, dAAa povov Th Sv- 
vader TH ev TH yovn Cwororety, Womep eitopev emt 

1 yap Z : yap ev vulg. 2 rovros Z: Tobro vulg. 
® Gepporns Z : vyporns vulg. 
; pev ody] yap Z. 5 péxpis ob PZ: péxpe vulg. 

hic locus haud sanus videtur ; fortasse cvvdedvacrar . . . 
taxéws secludenda ; om, =. 
7 jévar A.-W., Z*: ewit X: elva vulg. 

4 See above, ch. 16. 
» Probably the words ‘‘the copulation . . . discharge the 
fetation ’’ should be deleted. 

114 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

that there is no necessity for any substance to pass 
from the male ; and if any does pass, this does not 
mean that the offspring is formed from it as from 
something situated within itself during the process, 
but as from that which has imparted movement to it. 
or that which is its “ form.” The relationship is the 
same as that of the patient who has been healed 
to the medical art. (6) This piece of reasoning is 
entirely borne out by the. facts. It explains why 
certain of those males which copulate with the 
females are observed to introduce no part at all into 
the female, but on the contrary the female intro- 
duces a part into the male. This occurs in certain 
insects. In those cases where the male introduces 
some part, it is the semen which produces the effect 
inside the female ; but in the case of these insects, 
the same effect is produced by the heat and dynamis 
inside the (male) animal itself when the female in- 
serts the part which receives the residue. And that 
is why animals of this sort take a long time over copu- 
lation, and once they have separated the young 
are soon produced: the copulation lasts until (the 
dynamis in the male) has “set’’ (the material in the 
female), just as the semen does; but once they 
have separated they soon discharge the fetation,? 
because the offspring they produce is imperfect ; all 
such creatures, in fact, produce larvae. 

However, it is the behaviour of birds and the group 
of oviparous fishes which provides us with our 

_ strongest proof (a) that the semen is not drawn from 

all the parts of the body, and (6) that the male does 

_ not emit any part such as will remain situated within 

the fetus, but begets the young animal simply by 

_ means of the dynamis residing in the semen (just as 

115 

ARISTOTLE 

730 a Ps 3 
THY evTopwrv, ev ols To OAAv mpoterat cis TO Appev. 

5 77 A e / 4 / e wy 5 é A 
€dv te yap trnvemia t¥yn KYovoa 1) Spyis, eav 
A a > 4 / , i. 
peta Taba dxevnTar, prjmw pretaBeBAnKoros Tov 
- if 
~ ~ , 
Wod €k TOD Wxpov GAov eivat eis TO AcvKaiveoBau, 
, / > A ¢ 7 77 c > c..— 
yoviysa yiverat avril dayvepiwv: edv te Bh Erépov 
> / 1 \» > Pe WE er , 
@yYevpevyn (7})' Kal €rt Wypod OvTos, KaTa TOV VoTEpoV 
dyevoarvtTa TO yévos atoBaiver Tay TO TV veoTTOV. 
10 510 vor TodTov Tov TpdTOv TV Tepi Tas dpvilas 
A / / ~ 4 
Tas yevvaias omovdalovtwv movoda., weraPaAdovres 
Ta mpO@ta oxeia Kal Ta VoTEpa, Ws od ovppeyvd- 
\ > / 50° > ‘A a 2rA6 A 
peevov Kal évurrdpyov, od” amd mavrds €AOdov To 
/ > > > a A a“ vO a J t 0 
oméppa: am apdoiv yap av iAdev, war elyev av 
A b) A 7, > A ~ 4 A ~ »” 
dis tadra pepy. aAAa TH Suvdper TO TOD appevos 
15 / \ > ~ 6 aN DX A dn if 
onépua thy ev TO Onder vAnv Kat Tpodjy Tovdy 
Twa KaTaoKkevaler. Tobto yap evdéyerar mrovetv TO 
Borepov éemevoeAOov ex Tod Oepydvar Kai rrépar* 
/ A A \ + ea a an“ > 4 
AapBaver yap tpodiy To wov ews av ad&avnras. 
~ 4 
To & atro cupBaiver Kal rept thy tev ixQdiwv 
yéeveoty THY @oToKOUpLevwv. STav yap amoTEeKY 
\ » Mes" ¢€ a] sr. ¢ »v > / A 0. tA P 
2074 wa 7 Ordreva, 6 appv emippaiver Tov Bopov: 
\ e A n”~ > , , ~ , A 
Kal @v pev av edarynrar, yovuia Tadra yiwerat Ta 
‘ 
wa, @v & dv pH, dyova, ws ovK €is TO TOGO 
a ~ > > > 
avpBadropevov tots Caos tod dppevos, add’ - eis 
TO TrOLV. . 
7 \ Ss AS 2 > A x > , \ 
"Ort pév obv ovr? amd mavrTos amépyeTar TO 
25 omé€pya Tots mpoiewevors omépua TOV Cwwv, ovTE 
1 <f> Peck. 
@ See below, 757 b 2 f. 

116 

evil > 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xxt. 

we said happened with those insects where the 
female inserts a part into the male). Here is the 
evidence. Supposing a hen bird is in process of pro- 
ducing wind-eggs, and then that she is trodden by the 
cock while the egg is still completely yellow and has 
not yet started to whiten : the result is that the eggs 
are not wind-eggs but fertile ones. And supposing 
the hen has been trodden by another cock while the 
egg is still yellow,? then the whole brood of chickens 
when hatched out takes after the second cock. Some 
breeders who specialize in first-class strains act upon 
this, and change the cock for the second treading. 
The implication is (a) that the semen is not situated 
inside the egg and mixed up with it, and (6) that it 
is not drawn from the whole of the body of the male : 
if it were in this case, it would be drawn from both 
males, so the offspring would have every part twice 
over. No; the semen of the male acts otherwise ; 
in virtue of the dynamis which it contains it causes the 
material and nourishment in the female to take on a 
particular character ; and this can be done by that 
semen which is introduced at a later stage, working 
through heating and concoction, since the egg takes 
in nourishment so long as it is growing. 

The same thing occurs in the generation of ovi- 
parous fishes. When the female fish has laid her 
eggs, the male sprinkles his milt over them’; the eggs 
which it touches become fertile, but the others are 
infertile, which seems to imply that the contribution 
which the male makes to the young has to do not 
with bulk but with specifie character. 

What has been said makes it clear that, in the case 
of animals which emit semen, the semen is not drawn 
from the whole of the body, and also that in genera- 

117 

ARISTOTLE PAD 
730 a \ i : \ \ / mu : / : a. 
To OAAv poser yevEOWw Maat oupPéderar: rots 
ouvioTaperots ws TO appev, aAAa TO pev aippev 
apxnv Keagews, TO O€ Onde THY dAqy, Soy. eK 
Tov eipnuévwv. dia yap tobro ovr’ atro Kal? 
aito yea to Ondv, Setrae yap apxiis ‘Kal Tod 
30 i fed ood Kal Siapiobyros (aAx° éviois. ye TaV 
Caiwv, ofov Tots Opviot, EXPL TWOS 7 dvous Svvarat 
yevvav’ atta, yap ovviotao.u pev, atedy, 8é ow- 

aot « ‘ , ¢ , 7 ¢ ‘ 
XXII tordou Ta KaAovpeva d7yvepia Wa), 7} TE yEeveots 
ev TO Bynes oupPaiver TOV piopeneay, GAN’ odK 
eis TO dppev ovr adTo TO" dppev mpoterar THY Yorn 
35 OUTE TO Pade, GAN’ dppes ets TO OAV oupBddrovrat 
730b TO Tap adT@v yuyvopevov, dia,Td ev TH Onder 
etvar THv vAnv e€ Fs €ort TO SyHucovpyovpevov. 
Kat ed0ds tiv pev aOpoov brapyew avayKaiov €€ 
Hs ouviorarat TO KUnUa TO Tp@Tov, THv O Emt- 
, > \2 Eo La 7 > 1¢ / ‘ 4 3 
yiveobar aev® ris dAns, tv’ ab&dvnrat TO KvOvpEVOV. 
Ld > > / > ~ /; € a ‘ A 
5 wor avayKn ev TO Onder dadpyew Tov Té6KOV" Kat 
yap mpos TO EvAw 6 TéKTWY Kal Tpds TO THAD 6 
Kepapevs, Kal dAws mAoa. 7) epyacia Kal 4 Kivnows 
% eaxdTn mpos TH vAy, olov 7% oiKoddpunots ev ToIs 
> / / > * > v4 \ 
oikodopoupevois. AdBor 8 av tis €k ToUTWY Kal 
A »” ~ / \_» \ SS, > A 
TO appev TAs ovpPddreTar mpos THY yEeveaw~ ovdE 
10 yap. TO Gppev admav mpolerat omepua, doa Te 
: dppev ovr’ atv 76 Buss.- Platt (al odk ard ro Z): dpper 

oir’ ab vo vulg. (<Kai> ov7” Sus.). 
det SY : de? vulg. 3 xvovpevov SZ: xudpevov vulg. 

« This is explained in the passage which follows (730 b 15 ff.). 
118 

== 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xx1.—xxn. 

tion the contribution which the female makes to the 
embryos when they are being.“ set ’’ and constituted 
is on different lines from that of the male; in other 
words, the male contributes the principle of move- 
ment ® and the female contributes the material. This 
is why (a) on the one hand the female does not gener- 
ate on its own: it needs some source or principle to 
supply the material with movement and to determine 
its character (though in some (female) animals, as in 
birds, Nature can generate up to a point : the females 
_ of these species. ¢ do actually “set” a fetation, but 
what they “set ” is imperfect, viz., what are known 
as wind-eggs) ; (6) on the other hand, the formation XXII 
of the young does in fact take place in the female, 
whereas neither the male himself nor the female 
emits semen into the male, but they both deposit 
_ together what they have to contribute in the female 
_ it is because that is where the material is out of 
_ which the creature that is being fashioned is made. 
And as regards this material, a good quantity of it 
x must of necessity be available immediately, out of 
_which the fetation is “‘ set” and constituted in the 
first place, and after that fresh supplies of it must 
be continually arriving to make its growth possible. 
_Henée, of necessity, it is in the female that parturi- 
_ tion takes place. After all, the carpenter is close by 
his timber, and the potter close by his clay ; and to 
put it in general terms, the working or treatment of 
any material, and the ultimate movement? which 
_acts upon it, is in all cases close by the material, e:g., 
the location of the activity of house-building is in the 
houses which are being built. These instances may 
help us to understand how the male makes its con- 
tribution to generation; for not every male emits 

119 

Ee ee Le Se —<—- Ce 

LP » ee 

730 b 
15 
20 
25 
30 
XXIII 

ARISTOTEE VOLT ANMY: 

mpoterat TOV appévwv, ‘ob8ey pidpiov Tobr’ é€otl 
TOO | yryvopévov KUNHATOS, womep odd amd rob 
TEKTOVOS _mpos 7p TOV Edw ohn our’ dmépxerat 
ovfev ovre Hoptov ovdey eoTw ev. 78. yeyvopLerys 
THS TEKTOVUKTS, aAn’ u) Hop) Kat TO. eldos an 
excelvou eyyivera dua THS KWIGEWS ev Th DAg,, Kat 
n pe pox ev 7) TO eldos Kal 1) emor nya Kwovat 
Tas. xetipas n Tt _pepiov ETEpov Towdy Twa. ivgow, 
éTépav pep ag’ dv 70 yeyvopevov €rEpov, Thy abriy 
d¢ ad’ dv ro adbré, at be xetpes ra opyava ta 8 
opyava Thy OXnv. dpotens dé Kal 7) puois® Oo 
dppeve TOV oméppa mpolepeveny Xpirae TO ‘onéppare 
ws opydvep Kal €xovrs Kivow evepyeta,. aoTep ray 
Tots Kara TEXunY yeropevous Ta Opyava, KuwetTaL 
ev €KElvols yap TwWS 7 KiVyoS THs -TéEXVNS.) Coa 
pev ovv mpoterau oTrepyas ovpBdrrerae Tobrov TOV 
TpoTrov eis THY yeveow" 6 doa de pa TpoteTau OmrEeppia., 
aan’ evaginar TO One eis TO dppev TOV abrod Tt i 
pLopiov, Gpowov EOLKE Trovodyrt @omep av et zy 
BAnv Kopioere TUS mpos Tov Snpuoupyov. be do- 
Oévevay yap TOV TowovTwy appevwv ovbev. bv éTépwy 
ola TE movelv uy) Pvous,, ada, pors avris mpoo- 
edpevotons laxyvovow at KwHoes, Kal €ouKe Tois 
mharrovow, od tots TEKTOLVOMEVOLS od yap je 
ETEépov Oyydvovea Snpuoupyet TO curnrrpeniits 
GAN’ abr?) tots abrijs jeopious. : { 
"Ev pev ‘odv rots Cahou wot Tots mropevtiKors 

5 
1 sic Z: at dé yxeipes Kat Ta opyava THY faqy vulg. . 
2 dvaus Z: dios 7 vulg. iL 

«Of. P.A. 639 b 16-—641 a 14. ve 
120 \ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xxm.—xxm. 

-semen, and in the case of those which do, this semen 

is not.a part. of the fetation as it develops. In the 
same way, nothing passes from the carpenter into the 
pieces timber, which are Ais material, and there is 
no part of the art of carpentry present in the object 
which is being fashioned ; it is the shape and the form 
which pass from the carpenter, and they come into 
being by means of the movement in the material. It 
is his soul, wherein is the “‘ form,” and his knowledge, 
which cause his hands (or some other part of his body) 
to move in a particular way (different: ways for differ- 

ent products, and always the same way for any one 

- Se 

‘ product) his hands move his tools and his tools move 

material.¢ In a similar way to this, Nature acting 
in the male of semen-emitting animals uses the semen 
as a tool, as something that has movement in actu- 
ality ; just as when objects are being produced by 
any art the tools are’ in movement, because the 
movement which belongs to the art is, in a way, 

_ situated in them. Males, then; that emit semen 
_ contribute to generation in the manner described. 

Those which emit no semen, males into which the 
female inserts one of its parts, may be compared to 
a craftsman who has his material brought to him. 
Males of this sort are so weak that Nature is unable 

__ to accomplish anything at all through intermediaries : 
_ indeed, their movements are only just strong enough 
_ when Nature herself sits watching over the business; 

the result is that here Nature resembles a modeller 

_ in clay rather than a carpenter; she does not rely 
“upon contact exerted at second hand when fashioning 

the object which is being given shape, but uses the 
parts of her own very self to handle it. 

In all animals which can’ move about, male and XXIII 

121 

Conclusion. 

whe , ARISTOTLE ViOiT ASEM 
730 b 
KEYWpLoTaL TO Orv Tob dppevos, sida) dir. €repov 
35 C@ov O7Av Kal erépov appev, TO be elden TavTor, 
731a —otov avOpwros 7] 7 tars" dppdrepa* é ev be ots purots 
jepeypevat abdrar at Suvdprets eiot, Kai ob KeXe~ 
prorat TO Orv To8 dppevos. 510 kal YE. aire, 
e€ abdtav, kal Tpoterat ob youny GAAa KUnA Ta 
Kadodpeva oméppara. Kat TovTO eaten Adyet 

5 SBE ODIs Townoas 

ouTw O° @otoKel pakpa Sesipedan pci Doidaid iM, 

TO TE yap. ov Kon pd €oTt, Kal &k Twos: abrod 
ylyverar TO ‘Gov, TO be Aourrov  Tpody},, Kal Tob 
oméppatos €k* Hépous ylyvera TO pudpevor, TO 

Aowrov* Tpodi) ylyverau TO Praore i TH ply 

10 7H TPT]. TpOTrov dé Twa, TavTa® atver Kal 
€v Tois KeXwpiapevov EXOVGL Sous TO Shite Kal TO 
dipper. orev yap denon yevvay, yiver au axepuoroy, 
aomep ev Tots dutois, Kat Bowrerau 7 7 dvors adtayv 
€v yivecbau 6 omep eudaiverar KaTa THY Oxy pLyvE- 
pévwv Kal owvdvalopevan [ev te C@ov ge 
e€ dudoir |.* 

15. Kal ra pev HA) mpoigweva. orp moNby xpdvov 
oven ea mreduKev, Ews av jovornon TO Konia, 
olov Ta ovrdvaldpeva Tov evTopv® ra 8, ews dav 
darorrépuly Te Tay emeradKk Tov avrod _Hopiov, x 
ovoTroet 70 Kenpo ev mAciove xpove, olov éml T@v 
evaiuwv. Td pev yap Ajrépas Te udpiov auvéexeTar, 

* ip immos LE: om. vulg.. 2 A.-W,:,70d PSY: Kal ex rob vulg. 
3 é« A.-W., Diels: eK (non kat) Z*: Kal €« vulg. . 
4 & aire addit Z. 

5 ravra Y: tatro A.-W.: radra vulg. - 
§ secl. Rackham. 

* Empedocles, fr. 79 (Diels). 

122 

‘GENERATION (OF ANIMALS, I. xx. 

le are separate; one animal is male and another 
emale, though they are identical in species, just as 
men and women are both human beings, and stallion 
nd mare are’ both horses. __ In plants, however, these 
culties are mingled together; the female is not 
parate from the male ; and that is why they gener- 
ate out of themselves, ee produce not semen but a 
fétation—what we.call their “.seeds.’”” _Empedocles 
uts this well in his poem, when he says %: 

BR; So the great trees lay eggs; the olives first . 

because. just as, the egg is a fetation from part. of 
which | » the creature. is formed while the remainder 
ae DORIS NEE, so from part of the seed is formed the 
| lant, ‘while the remainder is nourishment 
for the shoot and the first root. And in a sort of way 
‘thé same happens even in those animals where male 
_and female are separate ; for when they have need 
)to,generate they cease to be separate and are united 
as they are in plants ; their nature desires that they 
“ame become one. And this is plain to see when 
they are uni and copulating [that one animal is 
pected out of the two of them]. 

> The natural practice of those\animals which emit 
mo semen is to remain united for a long time, until 
<the.male) has.“ set ” the fetation : those Insects 
which, copulate -are an example of this. Other 
‘animals, however, remain united until the male has 
Mntroduced from those “ parts ”° of himself which he 
f inserts one which will.“ set’ the fetation but will 
take a longer time to do so: the blooded animals 
illustrate this. The former sort remain in copulation 
me ® Sée 732 a 29. 
_ © The use of “ part” here to refer to semen is a good 
illustration of the meaning of this term in Aristotle. 

4 

1238 

731 a 

731 b 

ARISTOTLE.» Visti) 

20 3é yor) év ayepars ouviornot mAeloow> mpoé-— 
preva" 8é TO ToLodrov dmoderar. Kal arexvas Eouce 
7a la dorep dura elvar Svaiperd, ofov et tis 
Kakeiva, OTe oméppa efeveyKerev, Siaddcere Kal 
Xwpicerev eis TO evuTTapxov OFA Kal. dppev. ; 

Kat ratra mdvra edaAdyws 4 dvdous Snuoupyet. 

25 THs pev yap TOv dut@v ovoeias odfev eatw aAdro- 
Epyov ovde mpa&is oddeula mAnv 7% TOD omépparos 
yeveots, WoT ere TodTO did Tod OxAcos Perel 
Kat Tod dppevos ovvdedvacpevwy, pigaca ne 
Si€OnKe pret? adAjAwv- 810 ev Tois dutois axdpr- 
otov TO Ofdv Kal TO dppev. GAAA epi pev duTav 

30 ev étépois eméokemTaL, ToD Sé Cov ov povov TO 
yevvyjoa. epyov (Tobro pev yap Kowov Tov Cwovtwv 
mdvTwv), dAAd Kal yrwoews Twos TAVTA fLeTEXOVOL, 
Ta pev TAciovos, Ta 8 eAdTTOVos, TA Sé TMaprav 
pukpas. aticbnow yap Eéxovow, 7 8 aicbnas 
yr@ois tis. tTavrns d€ TO Tiwwov Kal adTYyLov TOAD 

35 Suaddper axotrotar pos Ppdvnow Kal mpos TO TH 
axbdywv yévos. mpos pev yap 76 dpoveiv worrep 
ovdev eivat Soxel TO Kowwveiv ads Kal yedoews 
udvov, mpos dé dvaobyotav® BéArvoTov: ayamnrov 
yap av ddfece Kat tavrns Tvyeiv THs yvwoew 
GAAa pn Ketcbar TeOveds Kal px ov.. Siadéper & 

1 zpoéueva coniecit Platt: zpoigueva vulg. 

2 dvarobnaiav| durdv 7 ABov Z, unde durod 7 Aiov addunt 
A.-W.3 pro mpos . . . BéArvorov inter ergo istud animal et ne 
est differentia mirabilis X (@avpdovov pro BéAtvorov Z*). 

@ Cf. above, 717 a 20. 
124 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xxi. 

for a fair part of a day ; whereas semen takes several 
days to “ set ” fetations, and when the creatures have 
emitted this they free themselves. Indeed, animals 
seem to be just like divided plants: as though you 
were to pull a plant to pieces when it was bearing its 
‘seed and separate it into the male and female present 
in it. 
_ Inall her workmanship herein Nature acts in every 
particular as reason would expect. A plant, in its 
essence, has no function or activity to perform other 
than the production of its seed”; and since this is 
roduced as the result of the union of male with 
female, Nature has mixed the two and placed them 
together, so that in plants male and female are not 
separate. Plants, however, have been dealt with in 
another treatise ; here we are concerned with animals, 
and generation is not the only function which an 
animal has—that is a function common to all things 
living. All animals have, in addition, some measure 
of knowledge of a sort (some have more, some less, 
some very little indeed), because they have sense- 
perception,” and sense-perception is, of course, a sort 
of knowledge. The value we attach to this know- 
‘Bledge varies greatly according as we judge it by the 
standard of human intelligence or the class of lifeless 
objects. Compared with the intelligence possessed 
“@by man, it seems as nothing to possess the two senses 
of touch and taste only ; but compared with entire 
absence of sensibility it seems a very fine thing 
indeed. We should much prefer to have even this 
sort of knowledge to a state of death and non-exist- 
ence. Now it is by sense-perception that animals 

> See 732 a 13, n. With this passage (731 a 29-b 3) ef. 
the whole Protrepticus passage there referred to. 

125 

: A UA ARESTOTLE OFF ASIA 

pte atobijoet 7a (Ga tev Covrwv pdvov. Byes oe 
dvdiyen kat Civ, éav* tov, oray Berjoy derorenety 
TO TOO Cdvros. épyov, TOTE. ovvdud era eo 
youre, Kal. ylyverau. domepavel gurov, _ Kabdarep 
el7ropiev. . it Fi atievatya Bru ; base 
Ta & dorpaxdBepua TOV i Sibeor perakd dvra TOV 
Cebeov Kal tv duTav, ws ev dpporepors ee rots 
10 yeveaw, ovderepwy Tout 70 epyov" dis pev yap 
dutov* ovr éyer tO OFAV Kal TO dppev K Kal i ob 
yer eis _ Erepor; @s dé Ldov od depen _abrob 
KaprroVv Bomep Td. gurd, dAAa ovviorara Kai 
yewwarar EK Twos ovordcews yeoeidods Kal bypas. 
GANG repli’ ev THs TovTwr yeveoews ett 

Aexréov. é: oP 
1 éav| 6 av A.-W. 2 durov Z: dori al 

* i.e., to reproduce itself, because TO Operrixin eh 

TO Alor 

bit re 

126 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, L. xx. 

_ differ from the creatures which are merely alive ; 
since, however, if it be an animal, its attributes must 
of necessity include that of being alive, when the time 
comes for it to accomplish the function proper to that 
which is alive,* then it copulates and unites and 
becomes as it were a plant, just as we have said. 
The Testacea stand midway between animals and 
plants and so, as being in both groups, perform the 
function of neither : as plants, they do not have male 
and female and so they do not generate by pairing ; 
as animals they bear no fruit externally like that 

borne by plants ; but they take shape and are gener- ~ 

ated out of a certain earthy and fluid coagulation. 
. The manner of generation of these creatures, how- 
cers set be described later.” 

must POSSESS, is also 7a rer érépov olov 

one ay al7 me 
In Bk. TIE, ch 

127 

731 b18 1 

20 

25 

B fx ry heey 4 ij 
t 

’ * hd a 

To de OfjAv Kal TO dppev ote pe elow dpyat . 

YEvErewrs eipiyrat | mporepov, kal tis 7 Sdvapies kal 

Mik 

O Adyos THs ovotas avta@v: dua TL be yeeros Kal 

€oTt TO pev OfAv 70 8 dppev, ws pev e& avdynns 
mpwtov Kwodvros Kal o7oias tAns* 
mpoidvra merpaobar det ppalewv Tov Adyov, ws Se — 
dua TO BéArvov Kai Tih airiay ri evend. iraness F 
avaber® exet THY dpx7y" erel ydp eate Ta pev 4 

aidta Kal beta TOV dvTwv, Ta 8 evdexdpeva Kal 

\ Al 
Kat TOU 

; 4 
elvas Kat p17) elvar, TO S€ Kadov Kai*To Beiov aitvov 

> 4 \ \ ¢ ~ / ~ , > cal 
aet KaTa THY adTod pvaw Tod BeATioves ev Tots © 
> / A A \ bas > / / > \ 
evdexopevois, TO Se iyi: aidvov ee €or. Kal 

1 s fortasse secludenda. 

Tage (=dvw6ev). 

‘ab 
eee. 

TO TOO Z. 
3 amo Tob TmavTos “adit BoA 

» See Introd. § 10. 
_ not the syntax, of the 

@ See Introd. §§ 25, 30, ete. 
* © The sense, though perha 
following sentence is clear. 
causes €€ avayK s (7. e., mechanical causes, viz., the “* 
and “* material ” 
duction of male and female individuals Aristotle describes in 
detail in Bk. [V. 765 b 5—766 b 26; ef. 767 a 36—768 b 36); 
and (6) the “ final” cause, the better purpose or ‘“‘end” for 

motive ”’ 

the sake of which male and female individuals are produced, : 

@ See Introd. § 7 (ii). 
128 

SS 

he contrast is between (a) q 

causes, the operation of which in the pro-— 

Se re 

BOOK II 

IT nave already said that the male and the female are 
“principles ”’ of generation, and I have also said 
what is their dynamis * and the logos ° of their essence. 
© As for the reason why one comes to be formed, and 
is, male, and another female, (a) in so far as this 
results from necessity,* i.e., from the proximate 
“motive cause and from what sort of matter, our 
argument as it proceeds must endeavour to explain ; 
(6) in so far as this occurs on account of what. is 
better, i.e., on account of the final cause (the Cause 
“for the sake of which ’’), the principle is derived 
from the upper cosmos.¢ What I mean is this. Of 
| the things which are, some are eternal and divine, 
others admit alike of being and not-being, and the 
_ beautiful and the divine acts always, in virtue of its 
| own nature, as a cause which produces that which 
is better in the things which admit of it’; while 
_ ¢ And this principle Aristotle proceeds to explain at once, 
_ since it is really beyond the normal scope of the present 
| treatise which is concerned chiefly with the ‘‘ motive ’’ and 
_ “ material ” causes of generation. dvwev (cf. ro dvw odpa, 
App. B §26)= via the “ heavens’ from the Unmoved Mover, 
“God.” The best commentary on the passage which follows 
| is afforded by Aristotle’s own statements in other treatises, 
‘of which the pertinent passages will be found in App. A 

7 Cf. Met. 1013 a 22 roAAav yap cai rob yravar Kal tis 
Kivyoews apx7 Tayabov Kal to Kaddv. “ 
F 129 

I 
Why the 
sexes exist. 

731 b 

732. a 

d 

ARISTOTLE 

elvau (kal jut) elvat)' Kat peradAapPBavew Kat rod 

xEtpovos Kat Tod BeAtiovos, BéAriov 8é vy pev 
cwpatos, To 8 Eepuibvyov Tob aydyou bia Ti 
30 kuyriv, Kal TO elvar Tob pun elvae Kal ro Civ Tod 
pn Civ, dua tadvras tas aitias yéveows Lewy éeotiv: 

> A \ > 4 ¢ / ~ ta f 
evel yap advvatos 7 dvois Tod ToLvovTou yevous — 
aidtos elvar, kal?’ dv evdéxerar TpotoV, KaTa TODTOV 

€oTw aidiov TO ywopevov. apiOud péev obv adv- 

vatov, 7) yap ovata TOY dvrwy ev TO kal? Exacrov: — 

~ : 9? > | 

35 towodTov 8° clzep Hv, aidvoy dv wv- elder 8 ev-— 
SZ \ i. od. tas , , da ON Sy ot ety 

éxeTat. d10 yevos act avOpirwy Kal Caw €oti 

~ > a A 
kal puTa@y. eet dé€ rovTwv apyn TO OAAv Kal TO 
” ? et ’ 0 ” 1. Ae tee 
dppev, evexa THs yevécews av ein TO OHAV Kai TO 
dppev ev tots odow éxadrepov tovtwy.” PBeAtiovos 

1 supplevit Platt. . : 

2 éxatepov tovTwy Z: om. vulg. 

* i.é., this is the Final Cause, which can be equated with 

“the better,” as opposed to the mere mechanical sort of © 

causation, See above 731 b 23. e fu 

» The reader may at first .be confused in this passage 
owing to the fact that Aristotlé uses aiévos in two senses: 
(a) in the true and full sense, as applicable to the d¢é@apra and 
Geta, as in line 731 b 25, in which sense it can be applied 
only to the things which od« évddéyerar eivar Kai ui) elvat, 

i.e.. which always are; but then he goes on to use it ina 

modified sense (6), and applies it to that which évdéyera: efvac 

Kai 7) elvat, 7.€., to To yeyvopuevor, and says that 76 yiyvopevov 
is didiov in the way which is open to it. (Aristotle seems to 

regard this extension of the use of diécos as justifiable, since, 

as he states in the passage of De anima quoted in App. A 

($ 17), 7a yeyvoueva, although they are not eternal, do partake 

im eternity.) ‘These two modes of being didwv he then 

describes more exactly as didiov dpbud (the eternity of: 

individual identity) and didcov eidec (the eternity of specific 
130 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

that which is not eternal admits of being (and not- 
being), and of aepeing a share both in the better 
‘and in the worse 3, als Soul is better than body, 
and a thing w hich has Soul in it is better than one 
which has not, in virtue of that Soul; and being is 
better than not-being, and living. than. not living. 
These are the causes om account of which generation 
of animals takes place,* because since the nature of 
a class of this sort is unable to be eternal, that which 
comes into being is eternal in thé manner that is 
open to it. Now it is impossible for it to be so 
numerically, since the “being” of’ things is to be 
found in the particular, and if it really were so, then 
it would be eternal’; it is, however, open to ‘it to 
be so specifically... That» is why there is always a 
_ elass' of men, of animals, of plants ;\ and since the 
_ principle of these is “the male.’ and “the female,” 
it will surely be. for the sake of-generation that 
“the male ”’ and “ the female,” are present in the 
, individuals which are male and female. And as the 

form). Hence, in the present sentence 7oodrov means dpibpo 
_ discov; and. the sense of the statement is. that if an animal 
really were apiOud didsov, its oteia would be aéduos, i.¢., 
a¢@apros ; in other words, it would no longer be a d8aprov 
or a yeyvopevov. The translation might be expanded as 
_ follows to bring out the meanin, ** Now it is impossible 
_ for it to beso, numerically, since t ie being ” of things is in 
_ the particular <i.¢., in the individual concrete object bor gy | 
_ of matter and form; and obviously no such particular d@aprov 
_ —animal or plant—can be numerically eternal> ;' and if it 
_ really were so, then it would be eternal <in the full and proper 
_ Sense of the term, viz., it would be a¢@aprov, and no longer a 
 yeyvopevoy at all>; it is, however, open to it to be: eternal 
: ifically.” It is useful to note that at Met. 999 b 33 
: Esto Sita Nene there is no persia ae ape the terms 
3 and xa®? €xacrov (70 apiOuad ev} 7 Exacrtov Aéyew 

serra ovdév).—See further, App. A $$ 15-18. 

131 

732 a 

ARISTOTLE)! 5) 5) 5) 

dé Kat Devorépas Tay dvdow ovons Ths atrias Tis 

5 Kwovons Tpwrns, H 6 Adyost bmdpyee Kab TO. €id0s, 

Tijs dns, PéXArvov Kai 70 KEX icbar TO kpetrrov 
Tod XElpovos. dua Toor’ év daots evdexerau Kat 
Kal? dcov evdexeTat, KEeX@pLoTat tod OyXeos 76 

dppev- BeArtov yap Kal Devdrepov fi’ apy) THs 

Kuyoews [7) appev dmdpxer) Tots “yevopevors* ohn 

10 be To" OAAv. OUVEpXETL dé Kal petyvurae _mpos 

THY epyaciay Tis yevecews 7H OyAer 70 dppev: 
avTn ‘yap Kon) Guporepors. 

‘(Kara peév odv TO perexew Tod Bidcoe. Kal. 700 
dppevos fH, did Kat ta puta perexer lwijs- Kara 
d€ Tv atcbnow To TOV Cowv €or, yevos, ToUTwY 

dé oxedov ev ada. Tois TopevTiKOs KEXwpLOTaL TO 
15 OfAv Kal To dppev bia Tas elpnuéevas aitias* Kat 
ToUTwY TO per, WoTrep eA€x On, mpoteTat oméepiia., ; 

A a : : >? 
Ta, oe od mpotera év TO ovvovacp. tovtov 8 

altvov ore ra. TYULOTEPA Kal avTapKéaTEpa THY 

pvow eoriv, wore peyelovs pererhndéva, Touro 
5° ovk dvev Beppotntos yuyiKis: avayKy yap TO 

20 petlov stro Tetovos Kwetoban durdpews, To bé 

Deppov Kwytikov. didmep, ws emt To wav Bre- 

» o Peck : @ vulg. 2 om. S. 

7o Y: 70 } yulg.: dAns 4.76 OAAv coni. A.-W., 76 <Ojdv> 
i Ofdu Bif.: sed fortasse haec verba secludenda. ser. Platt 
70 dppev brdpxer Tots ywouevors 7) } OAn F 76 Orv. 
4 vy. 11-23 secludenda. 

* Of. 716 a 5, iP 

» i.e., the Material Cause. Cf. 716 a 5. ; 

& See Introd. §§ 1) ff., 10, 50. 

4 This paragraph seems to be out of place, cance of 
various remarks which are irrelevant here. Cf. 715 a18 ff., 
and parts of Bk. I, ch. 23. 

132 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

proximate motive cause,? to which belong the logos 
and the Form, is better and more divine in its nature 
than the Matter,” it is better also that the superior one 

should be separate from the inferior one. That 
is why wherever possible and so far as possible the 

male is separate from the female, since it is some- 

thing better and more divine in that it is the principle 
of movement ¢ for generated things, while the female 
serves as their matter. The male, however, comes - 

together with the female and mingles with it for the 

_ business of generation, because this is something that 

concerns both of them. ~O 
_ 4[Thus things are alive in virtue of having in them 

_ a share of the male and of the female, and that is why 
_ even plants have life. The class of animals, however, 
_ is) (what it is) in virtue of its power of sense-per- 
_ ception.’ In practically all animals which can move 
_ about the male and the female are found separate, 
_ and the causes are the ones which have been stated ; 

and, as was said,’ some of them emit semen during 

"copulation, some do not. The reason for this is that 
the higher animals are more self-sufficient in their 
_hature, and so are large in size: this cannot be so 

without heat of Soul, since of necessity the larger a 

_ thing is, the greater the power required to move it, 
_and heat acts as a motive power. Hence, if we take 

| ¢ Cf. P.A, 666 a 34 76 pev yap (Gov aicOjyce wpiora, and 

651 b 4, 653'b 22. Aristotle seems to have perceived early 
_the importance of this point, as it occurred in his early work 
Protrepticus. See Iamblichus, Protrepticus 7 (44. 9 Pistelli; 

37. 9 Walzer, Aristot. Dial. Frag.), a passage which accord- 
ing to Jaeger ( Aristotle, 69) comes from Aristotle’s Protrep- 
ticus : GAa pi 76 ye Civ Th aicbdvecBa Scaxpiverat Tod pH Civ, 
and with that whole passage cf. 731 a 29—-b 3 above. ~ 

7 Bk. I, ch. 17. 

133 

* 

ARISTOTLE ()) 1400 

732 a . 
povras ciety, TO | Braye peilw tdv a 

TO ‘aopevtiKd TOV poviwv bde- _darep epic ] 
oméppa did ae Oepudrara Kal TO } jeyeBos.| : 
Kai rept pev dippevos Kal Oi Acos, 80 iv airlay ' 
25 eoTiv EKATEPOV, elpn Tae. ef olyea 
Tay 8é Caro TH [Lev reAcowoupyet ‘Kab eeepc 
TEL Obpale Spovov €avT@, otov éca Cporoet eis 
Tobppares, 7a € ddidpOparov € exTikTel Kal ObK am- 
ewAngos THY adToo popdiy. Tov O€ Towodreay 7a 
prev evaia @otoKel, Ta O° avai. a @oroKet 
oxwAnKoroKel. Srapéper 8 wov eal oKddng: gov 
30 HEV, yap eoTtw €& ov yiverat TO _Yevopevoy. eK 
[Lepous, TO Se Aowndy €or. Tpop?), TH yur yen, 
oxwAng & &€& ob TO ywopevov drov dor. yiera. 
T&v dé eis TO davepov Spovov atoteAovvTwy C@ov 
Kat CworoKovvTwv Ta. pev ev0ds év atbrots two- . 
ToKel, olov avOpwios Kat immos Kal Bods: Kal 7 TOV 
35 Oadarriay de? dehdis kat Tada Ta To.bra, Ta 
732b oO eV adrois poroxnoayra Tp@Tov obrw Lqoroket 
Opace, olov Ta _ oehaxn Kahovpeva. rv ry (@o- 
ToKoUvTwy Ta: pev ,TéAcLOV. TpOleTaL TO WOV, OLov 
dpvilles Kai God TeTpdTr0da wMoTOKEl Kal doa a7r00a, 
olov cadpar Kal yeAGvat Kai Tv Ohewv TO TA€iaTOV 
syevos (ta yap To’Twy wa Grav e€APn, ovdKeETL 
AapBaver avenow), 7a 8° dred, ofov ot 7 ixBves 
» Platt. &' 62 oni: PSYI08 

@ See Introd. 8§ 74 ff. 

> Cf. 152.2..27, T58 b 10 ff., and H.A. 489 b 6 ff. The 
distinction which "Aristotle makes here is that between the 
utilization of yolk as the raw material of embryonic develop- 

134 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

a general view, we may say that blooded animals are 

larger than bloodless, and mobile ones larger than 
stationary ; and they are the ones which emit semen 
on account of their heat and their size.] 
_ We have now stated the Cause why each of the 

two, male and female, is 

Some animals bring their young to perfection, and The various 

bring forth externally a creature similar to them- Soestbe. 
_selves—e.g., those which are externally viviparous ; 
_ others produce something which is unarticulated and 
has not yet assumed its proper shape. In the latter 

class those which are blooded lay eggs, those which 
t are bloodless produce (either eggs or) larvae.*_ The 

_ difference between an egg and a larva is this: an 
egg is something from part of which the new creature 
i is formed, while the remainder is nourishment for it ; 
whereas in the case of the larva, the whole of it is used 
_ to form the whole of the offspring.” Of the animals 
_ which produce externally a perfected creature similar 
' to themselves, i.e., the Vivipara, some are internally 
1 -_Viviparous from the outset (as man, horse, ox; and 
_ of sea-creatures, the dolphin and the other animals 
_ of that sort), others are internally oviparous at the 
first stage, and thereafter are externally viviparous 
_ (as what are called Selachia). Of oviparous animals, 
some lay their eggs in a perfected state (as: birds, 
_Oviparous quadrupeds and footless animals, e.g., 
- lizards and tortoises, and the great majority of the 
"serpents *\—eggs which onée they are laid do not 
grow any more ; others lay their eggs in an imper- 

ment, and the utilization of tissue-disintegration products in 
metamorphosis. The embryo feeds upon its yolk, but the 
pupa feeds upon itself. 

* The viper is the exception ; see below, line 21. 

135 

ARISTOTLE wits 

732 b 
Kat To. padaxdorpaKa kat Ta pLaddKua KaAovjeva* 

ToUTWwY ‘yap 7a wa avédverau e&eOdvra. 
Ilavra be Ta. Cworoxodvra [%) poroKobyra) & evoupad 
coTw, Kal TO. evauia. 7 Cworonet 7 v] @orokel, ooa 
: 10 7) GAws ayova coTw. TOV 8 avaiwwy 7a evTopa 
oxwAnkoroxel, 60a y) eK ovvdvacpod | yiverau a) 
avrd ouvdudlerar. €oTL yap Evia, TowatTa Ta 
evTOLOV a yiverat bev abrouata, €oTL be Oijrea 
Kal _appeva., Kal €k ovvdvalopeveny yiverat. (Te 
avrav, dredes pevrou 70 yeyvopnevov: » 8 atria 
eipntat mpoTEpov ev ETEpots. 

15 ZupBatver dé mon dnd ahs Tots yeveow. 
ovUTe yap Ta diroda mTdvTa SworoKet (ot yap opvides 
@oroKobat) ovr” @oroxel mavra (6 yap dvopwros 
Cworoxel), ovTe Ta TeTpdTOba TavTAa WoToKel 
(ios yap Kal Bods kal ada pupto. Cworoke?) 
ovre CworoKel ravra (catpo.*? yap Kal KporddetAou 

20 Kal dMa mona @otoxodaw). ovd ev T@ mO0das 
ExXEW 7 7) Exeuw Suadeper- Kal yap daroba Cworoxel, 
olov ot exes Kal Ta oEeAdyn, Ta 5’ WoToKe?, olov 

\ ~ > /, La \ \ ~ ” + 
70 TOV ixfiwy yévos Kal TO TOV GAAwY dew: 
kal TOV mddas é€xdvTwY. Kal woToKEel ToAAa Kai 
Cwortokel, oiov ta cipnueva teTpdaroda. Kal ev 
ec a A a \ / ” »” 
25 adrois 5¢ CwotoKke?l Kal mddas exovTa, olov avOpw-— 
\ » e , \ , ‘ 
mos, Kal amoda, olov darawa Kat deAdis... TadTn 
\ > > ” 8 r A 35° ” ~ 8 ~ 
pev obv ovK Eo7e duedciv, 088’ airiov THs Siadopas 
1 seclusit Platt (idem Sus.). 
2 catdpo. PSYZ*: cadpa O», vulg. 

* Of. 718 b 8 and note there. > See 721 a 3:-ff. 
¢ Aristotle may have in mind the method of dichotomy, 
against which he inveighs elsewhere (see P.A. 642 b 5 ff., 

136 

‘GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

fect state, as the Fishes, and the Crustacea and the 
Cephalopods as they are called, whose eggs do grow 
in size after they are laid.” 

All animals that are viviparous [or oviparous] are 

_ blooded, and animals that are blooded are either 
viviparous or oviparous, apart from those which are 
completely infertile. Of bloodless animals, Insects 
produce a larva ; this holds good both for those which 
are formed as a result of copulation and those which 
themselves copulate.’ (A note of explanation : there 
are certain Insects which, although formed by spon- 
taneous generation, nevertheless are male and female, 
and as a result of their copulation something is formed, 
though it is imperfect : the cause of this has already 
been stated elsewhere.) 

Actually there is a good deal of overlapping be- Classifica- 
tween the various classes. Bipeds are not all vivi- {2 of 
parous (birds are oviparous) nor all oviparous (man is 
viviparous) ; quadrupeds are not all oviparous (the 
horse and ox and heaps of others are viviparous), nor 
all viviparous (lizards and crocediles and many others 
are oviparous). Nor does the difference lie even in 
having or not having feet : some footless animals are 
viviparous (as vipers, and the Selachia), some are 
oviparous (as the class of fishes, and the rest of the 
serpents) ; and of the footed animals many are ovi- 
parous, many viviparous (e.g., the quadrupeds already 
mentioned). There are footed animals which are 
internally viviparous (as man), and footless ones also 
(as the whale and dolphin). So we find no means here 

_ for making a division ©: the cause of this difference 

aay 2 ee 

and my note there), as used, though for a different purpose, 
by Plato in Sophist and Politicus (e.g., the division into 76 
melov and 70 vevatixéy at Sophist 220 a). 

137 

ARISTOTLE |) /. 14489 

732 b . 2 
tavrTns obfev T&v mopeuTiuKav dpydvwv, adAa Cwo- 

ToKel per’ Ta TeAewWTEpa my dvow tov Cawv Kat 
30 werexovra Kaapwrépas d dpyiis: odbev yap Lworonet 
ev adT@, p22) Sexopevor TO med. Kal dvamvéoy. 
TeAcdbrepa dé Ta Oeppdtepa tiv dvow Kal byporepa 
Kal Ba) yewsdn. 7Hjs de Depudrnros THS quouris 
Spos 6 TAcUpLwv, 6owv evaiupids eoTw: dAws Hey yap 
TO. exovra merous TOV pn) exovroy Depudrepa., 
35 ToUTwy O° abt&v Ta p71) coudov ExovTa punde oTt- 
733 a ppov pnd? oAtyatwov GAN’ Evayplov kat puadaxdv. 
Homep d€ TO pev C@ov réAevov,” 6 d€ akwAnk Kal 
TO Wov ateA€s, oUTWs TO TEAELOV eK TOD Tehevorépov 
yivecbas néduxev, Ta Sé Oepudstepa pev Sia TO 
exe mAcvpova, Enporepa dé Thy iow, 7 Ta yv- 

5 Xporepa pev byporepa dé, Ta prev WoroKel TédELov 
pov, Ta 5 poronoavra CworoKkel ev adrois. ot 
per yap opviles Kal Ta hodidwra Sia pev Bep- 
pornta teAeavoupyotar, dua dé EnpdtnTa wWoro- 
Kodot, Ta Oe oehaxy Oeppa. pev Arrov Tovrey, 
dypa de paMov, a WOTE perexet dpporepern” Kat yap 
10 WoToKet Kai Cworoket ev abrois, @oToKet Hey OTL 
uxpd, Cworoxet &° ote tbypa: Ceorundy yap. TO 
dy pov troppivrd:res Sé Tod epabdyou to Enpov.  emet 
8 ovTe mTEpwrda ovUTE pohibarra otre Aemdwrd 
cotw, & onjweta Enpas waddov Kal yeddous ddcews, 

1 py avrois add. Z*. 2 réMecov PSY : 7éAcov vulg. 

@ See Introd. § 38. > Not a living creature. 
138 

——— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

does not lie in any of the organs of locomotion. 
No; those animals are viviparous which are more 
perfect in their nature, which partake of a purer 

* principle * ; in other words, no animal is internally 
viviparous unless it draws in breath—respires. The 
more perfect animals are those which are by their 
nature hotter and more fluid and are not earthy. 
(The test of natural heat is the presence of the lung, 
provided it has blood in it. Speaking generally, 
animals which have a lung are hotter than those 
that have none, and of the former those are hotter 
whose lung is not spongy nor compact nor poorly sup- 
plied with blood, but well supplied with blood and 
soft.) And since an actual animal is something per- 
fect whereas larvae and eggs are something imperfect, 
Nature’s rule is that the perfect offspring shall be 
produced by the more perfect sort of parent. Those 
animals which are hotter (as their having a lung indi- 
cates), though of a more solid* consistency, or are 
colder but more fluid, either (a) are oviparous and 
lay a perfect egg, or (5) first lay an egg and then are 
viviparous internally. Thus, birds and the animals 
with horny scales, on account of their heat, produce 
something perfect, but on account of their solidity 
it is an egg only’; the Selachia are less hot than - 
these are, but more fluid ; hence they share in the 
characteristics of both—they are oviparous because 
they are cold creatures, and internally viviparous 
because they are fluid (the reason being.that fluid 

_ matter is conducive to life, whereas solid matter and 

the living organism are at opposite poles); and as 
they have neither feathers nor horny plates nor 

_ scales, which are signs of a constitution that tends to 
_ be solid and earthy, the egg which they produce is 

139 

733 a 

. 16 ad7@, 0b" év TO OO €rumorAdle TO vyenpov. Kat 

733 b 

20 

30 

(2.1) MARISPORUDIT ARG 
padarov TO @ov yevvOow" dorep yap odd” ev 

dua TodTO ets avre @oroxet Ovpale yap dv tov 
due rage te TO WOv, ovK éxov mpoBoAry. Sha Sika 
2 puxpa Kal Enpa padrov wotoxet “per, 
arelés, Be TO @ov, Kat onpdd_ppoy Se. ba TO 
yenpa. elvan Kat areAes mpoteabar, iva, aus Tau 
dvdaxny € exov TO dorpaxddes. ‘ot prev ody ixddes 
AemOwrtoi 6 ovres Kal TO. padakcorpaKa yenpae OvTa. 
oxAnpodeppa TA wa yervé. Td. be paddKua, womep 
abra yrAicxpa. TY Too oesparas €oru pvow, ovTws 

i 

ole areAg mpoiepeva Ta Wa? mpoterau “yAc- 
oxpornra. mepl TO Konia. modi. Ta 8" evropa 
mavra oKwAnkoroKel. €oTt 8 dmavra divautj1a. Ta. 
evropia., 50 Kal® okwAnKoToKobyra Ovpate. 7a 8 
avatpa od Tava oxwAnKoroKel amas hs oe 
TOUGL yap ddAnAows [ra 7” évrojia Ta. oxwAnKo- 
ToKobvTa: Kal Ta GateAes TiKTOVTa. TO @ov, olov 
oT ix Oves ot AemBwrot Kat Td. padaxdorpara 
Kal To paAdicvo.. TOUTWY pev yap To oa oK@- 
Anco) eorly (avénouv yap Aap Barer Apate), 
EKO dof oKwAnkes yivovrau mpotovTes @o- 
<deis: Sv Sé tpdmov, ev Tots Berepov. Siopiodper.. 

Act S€é vofjoa ws «bd Kat édeés thy yéeveow 
amodidwow 7 dvois. TA pev yaprTeAcwTEpa Kat 
Oepporepa’ trav Cawy réAcvov arrodidwor TO) TéKVOV 
Kata, Td Trotdv (Kara. d€ 76 Ttoodv GAws obey TaV 

ot ie 

1 aiza P: adr vulg. 

* kai ra PSY. ¥ seclusi. 

7a €vropa Kal Ta oxwAnxoroKobyra Z=: ‘ra'7” ‘evropa be 
5 zeXevorara Kat Oepporara P. 

@’ Bk, PH, ch.'9: 

4 

140 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

a soft one: the earthy substance does not come to 

the surface in the egg any more than it does in the 

creature which lays it. And that is why they lay 
their eggs internally: if the eggs emerged they 
would be destroyed throu lack of protection. 

. Animals that ténd to be cold and solid lay eggs, 

_ it is true; but their egg is imperfect, and it has a 
_ hard covering (a) because the animals themselves are 
_ earthy and (5) because it is in an imperfect state 
_ when laid, ‘and ‘the shelly exterior serves as a pro- 
_ tection to keepit safe. Thus fishes, being scaly, and 

Crustacea, being earthy, produce eggs with a hard 

_ covering ;_ while the Cephalopods, which also lay 

ae 

imperfect eggs, keep them safe by a method in ac- 
cordance with the sticky nature of their own bodies ; 
they exude a large amount of sticky substance over 
the fetation. «Insects all produce larvae.. Now all 
Insects are bloodless, and that actually is why they 
are externally larva-producing. But it is not true 
that all bloodless animals are larya-producing without 
qualification, beeause there is overlapping as between 

_ the larva-producing animals and those that produce 
_ imperfect eggs (e,g., the scaly fishes, the Crustacea 

and the Cephalopods), since the eggs of the latter 

are larva-like, in’ that they grow bigger after they 

have been laid externally, while the larvae of the 

_ former, as they develop, become egg-like :. we shall 

explain later how this happens.*.' 

. We should notice how well Nature brings genera- 
tion about in its several forms : they are arranged in 
a regular series, thus: (1) The more perfect and 

_ hotter of the animals produce their young in a perfect 
_ State so far as their quality is concerned (no animal 
_ brings forth young that are perfect in stze, because 

141 

ARISTOTLE)! ! {4.10% 

733 b : ; ! - 
Cw: mdvta yap yevoueva AapBdver abEnow), Kai 

yevva 87 tadra CHa ev abrois eds. ta Sé dev- 
5 Tepa ev adrois prev od yevva Tédeva edOUs (CworoKet 
yap wotokyjaavra mp@tov), Ovpale dé Cworoxei. 
7a d€ Cov pev od téAciov yerva, wov de yevva, 
Kat TobTo TéAcLov TO @dv. Ta d Ere TOUTwWY yuU- 
xXpoTépav exovra atv dvow wmov pev yerva ov 
tédevov 5é wov, adr ew reAevoirat, Kabdaep ‘TO 
10 TOV NemBarev ixOdev yévos Kal Ta paraxdorpara 
kat 7a paddka. TO be TeUTTOV yévos real puxpo- 
Tatov ovd wWoToKe €& abrod, aa Kal TO' ToLodTOV 
ew oupBatver mabos avT@, worrep elpyras: Ta 
yap evropa. oxwhnkoroKet TO mp@rov" mpoeAOaw 8 
wwoyns yiverar 6 onw@ané (7 yap xpvoadris ka- 
15 Aovjevn Sdvapuy wod €xet)* eit’ ex Todrou yiverau 
C@ov, ev 7H tTpity peraBodH AaPov +76 Tis yevéeoews 
tédos. 

Ta pev odv od yiverau TOV Cav dir o7épparos, 
waomep €AéxOn Kal Tporepov: Ta 8 évaya mavra 
yivetat amo O7TEpHATOS, ooa exc ovvdvacpod ye 

20 veTau, mpoteuevou Tod appevos «is TO OAAV yovny, 
Hs eloeAPovons Ta CHa ovviorata Kai AapPaver 
THY oiKelavy pwopdyv, Ta pev ev adrois Tots Cdous 
doa wotokel, Ta 8 ev wots [Kal oméeppacr Kal 
TowavTais aAAais amoKpiceow |.” 

Tlepi dv éoriv aropia rAciwv, mHs Tore yiverat ex 

1 zoo Bekker per typoth. err. 

2 seclusit Platt (om. 2%), sed monet quaedam de plantis 
fortasse excidisse. 

@ Above, 733 a 31. 
142 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

they all grow in size after they have been produced), 
and these young which they generate are. living 
creatures inside them from the outset. (2) The 
second class do not generate perfect animals within 
themselves from the outset : although they are vivi- 
parous, they lay eggs first of all; externally however 
they are viviparous. (3) Others produce not a per- 
fect animal, but an egg, which is perfect. (4) Those 
whose constitution is still colder than this produce 
an egg, but it is nota perfect one : it reaches its per- 
fection outside the parent. Examples are the scaly 
fishes, the Crustacea and the Cephalopods. (5) The 
fifth class of creatures, which are the coldest of all, 
do not even lay an'egg directly themselves, but the 
formation of their egg takes place outside the parent, 
as has been said.4 What happens is that Insects 
first produce a larva, then the larva develops till it 
becomes egg-like (what is called the chrysalis is really 
equivalent to an egg °); then out of this an animal 
is formed, and it is not until this third stage in its 
series of changes that it reaches the end and perfec- 
tion of its generation. 

There are, then, some animals which are not formed 
from semen, as I have in fact said already. All 
blooded ones, however, are formed from semen, so 
many as are formed as the result of copulation, that 
is to say, the male emits semen into the female, 
and upon the entry of the semen the young animals 
are “set” and constituted and assume their proper 
shape ; with the viviparous animals this stage takes 
place within the parent, with others in the eggs [and 
seeds and other such secretions]. 

And on this subject we are confronted by no small How is the 

» Lit., “ has the dynamis of an egg”: see Introd. § 26. 
143 

733 b 

734 a 

ARISTOTLE 

Tob o7éppatos TOV puTav' 7 TaV Codwy Stioby. 
25 avayKn yap TO yryvopevov Kal ex Tivos yiveoBar 

YY ¢ , ’ > \ > > \ vy - \ 
Kal Ud Twos Kai TL. €€ 08 pev ody eortly BAN, Av 
evia prev Ca exer mpwitynv ev adrots, AaBdvra® ex Tod 
OyAcos, ofov doa pr) Cworoketrar aAAa oKwAnko- 
ToKelTaL 7) WoToKeiTar, Ta Sé expt TOppwW EK TOD 

30 OxjAcos AapBdver dia 7d AnAdlew, dorep doa Cwo- 

~ \ / >? \ > \ hai / > A 
TOKELTAL p17) LOvov eKTOS GAAG Kal evTds. e& OD pev 
> / ¢ 4 oe > id aA \ 
obv yiverat, 7 Tovadtn VAn eoriv: Cynreirar be viv 
> > e 2 2, (£2; Fa = i \ / ” ‘\ 
ovk €€ ob GAN’ dd’ od yiverar Ta popia. Frov yap 
~ ” a nn > / ~ \ 
Tov cEwhev rt Trove, 7 evuTrapxov" Tt ev TH youn Kal 
/ \ a> > ‘ / a nn 
oméppati: Kal Todr é€otly 4 pépos tt puyhs 7 
CM Le 5) ” / ~ \ on an 
uxt) 7) €xov av ein puynv. Tav pev odv e€whev 
a ¢ wo ed 9 r a Saar 
Tl Toeiy EkacTov 7) TOV oTAdyyvwrv 7 TOV GAAwY 
pep@v adoyov av ddkeuev: Kweily Te yap pa) am- 
TOMEVOY GdVVATOV Kal [L1) KWobYTOS TAaaxEW TL DITO 

4 > > ~ ” a / > ah 
5 TOUTOV. EV aUT@ apa TH KUNmaT. EevuTTapyYer Te 

” v4 > Aa , ” , Worn x 
787 7° adrod pdpiov 7) Kexwpiopevov. TO [Lev odD 

1 -év dutav Z: 76 durov vulg. 

2 daBorvra S: AapBavovra vulg. 

evurdpxov Peck: éevumapye vulg. 
4 78n 4 Y: } 87 vulg. 

3 

2 The discussion which follows shows that Aristotle fully 
appreciated the greatest problem of embryological theory, a 
problem which gave rise to centuries of controversy. Does 
the embryo contain all its parts in little from the beginning, 
unfolding like a Japanese paper flower in water (‘‘ pre- 
formation ’”’), or is there a true formation of new structures 
as it develops (“‘ epigenesis’’)? Aristotle was an epigenesist, 
but he was not vindicated till the time of C. F. Wolff and 
K. E. von Baer, at the end of the 18th and the beginning of 
the 19th century. The history of the controversy will be 
found in J. Needham’s History of Embryology and A. W. 

144 

— oe ee ee 

+n 

i it 

4 

P 
\ GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1 
puzzle.* How, we ask, is any plant formed out of the embryo, 
_ seed, or any animal out of the semen? That which 
is formed by means of a process must of necessity be 
formed (a) out of something (6) by something (c) into 
something. “Out of something.” is of course 
is the material or matter. Some animals have their 
_ primary matter? within themselves, having derived 
it from the female parent, e.g., those animals which 
are produced not viviparously but out. of larvae 
or eggs. Others derive it from the mother for a 
considerable time by being suckled. These are the 
animals which are produced viviparously not exter- 
nally only but also internally.” So then, that “ out 
of which” the parts are formed is material of this 
sort. The problem now. before us however is not 
_ Out of what, but, By what, are they formed? Either 
something external fashions them, or else something 
present in the semen or seminal fluid; and this is 
either some part of Soul, or Soul, or something which 
_ possesses Soul. Now it would appear unreasonable 
_to suppose that anything external fashions all the 
individual parts, whether they be the viscera or any 
others, because unless it is in contact? it cannot 
set up any movement, and unless it sets up a 
“movement no effect can be produced upon any- 
thing by it. Hence it follows that there must 
be something already present inside the fetation 
itself, which is either a part of it or separate from it. 

“Meyer's The Rise of Embryology. Like many erroneous 
ries, preformationism contained some truth, for we 
‘know to-day that the course of the embryo’s development 
is predetermined by its genetic constitution. 

_ © Cf. 729 a 33 note. 

© This excludes the Selachia. 

# Cf. Bk. |. 730 b 5 ff., and see App. B § 22, n. 

145 

734 a 

ii ARISTOTLE i re 

A 

dAdo re elvat Kex@propevov dhoyov" yer bevros 
yap Tod Caov méTEpov PUeiperae 7) by eppever; aan’ 
oudev ToLovTOV paiverat € evov 0 ov Ldptov Tod OXov 

i) purod 7 7 Cqov € coriv. GAG pay Kal TO $Beipeabai 

10 ye moufoay eire mavTa Ta pepy €lTE TWA aTOTOV* 
7a Aoura yap Ti TroVAT Et, iy nee yap exeivo pev TH 
Kapdiay, elr’ éedOapn, avr S° ErEpor, Tod adtob 
Adyou 7 TavTa : Pbetpeobax 1) 7 mdr peeve. adilerat 
dpa. avtod apa HOpiov eoTw, 6 evOds evuTdpyet 
ev T@ omeppart, el dé 67) Ha €oTt THs. youxtis i 
15 pnbev 6 6 py Tob owpares, €oTw ev TwWt Hopi, Kal 
epapuxor dv tu ein popiov eddus. sty 
Ta ody aAAa meds 5 } yap Tol dua mavra yly- 
veTar Ta Hopia., otov Kapdia TAcvpoov imap og- 
Barwos Kal trav G\Awv Exactov, 7 edeéfs, Womep 
év trois Kadovpévors "Opdéws emecw: exe? yap 
20 dpoiws dyoi yiyvecbar tO Cov tH Tod Suxrdou 
mAoKH. ste pev odv ody dpa, Kal TH alcOjoe eoti 
davepov' Ta pev yap gaivera evovTa 78% TOV 
popiwy, Ta 8 ov. dtu 8 od bua puKpornTa | ov 
paiverat, d7jAov- pete yap To péyebos adv 6 
TVEvpLWV THs Kapdlas VoTepov daiverar THs Kapdias 
25 ev TH e& apyfs yevéoer. mel S€ TO ev TpOTEpov 
76 8 borepov, mérepov Odrepov move? Odrepov, Kai 

@ It would be inconsistent to say that the disappearan 
was arrested at some arbitrary stage in the process. 

» Apart from rational Soul, the connexion is reciprocal ; 

and Aristotle often remarks that there is no part of the body 

which has no Soul in it; see 726 b 22 and 735 a 6 ff. 

146 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

To suppose it is some other thing, and separate from 
it, is not reasonable. . If it were, the question arises: 

When the animal’s generation is completed, does this 
something disappear, or does it remain within the 
animal? We cannot detect any such thing, some-— 
thing which is in the plant or the animal and yet is no 
part of the organism as a whole. And again, to say 
that it fashions all the parts or some parts of the 
organism and then disappears is ridiculous. If it 
fashions only some of the parts, what will fashion 
the rest? Supposing it fashions the heart, and then 
disappears, and the heart fashions some other part : 

to be consistent we must say that either all the parts 
disappear or all the parts remain.* -It must, then, 

_ persist. And.therefore it must be a part nf the 

whole, existing in the semen from the outset. And 
if it is true that there is no part of the Soul which is 

- notin some part.of the body,’ then it must also be 
_ a part which contains Soul from the outset. 

How, then, are the other parts formed? Either 
they are all formed simultaneously—heart, lung, 
liver, eye, and the rest of them—or successively, as 
we read in the poems ascribed to Orpheus, where he 
says that the process by which an animal is formed 

_ resembles the plaiting of a net. As for simultaneous 

formation. of the parts, our senses tell us plainly that , 

_ this does not happen: some of the parts are clearly 
-to be seen present in the embryo while others are 
not. And our failure to see them is not because they 
_ are too small ;, this is certain, because although the 

lung is larger insize than the heart it makes its appear- 

ance later in the original process of formation. Since 

one part, then, comes earlier and another later, is it 
the case that A. fashions B and that it is there on 

147 

734 a 

734 b 

|) VARISTOTLENTANAV SO 
€or. dud TO eyopevor, 7 emi peta rode yiverat 
TOOE; A€yoo 8 ofov pee 7 Kapdia Sips ws! rrovet 

TO Hmap, TooToo ETE pOH, Tl, dAAd, 708¢ pera. 76 Se, 
foseaes peta TO. Tats sage vyiverat), adv’ ody. to. 

30 €xelvov. édyos 8 rodrov, re bo To evrehexely 

OVTOS TO Sumayer..2 ov VIVES, &y tots dooce 7 7) Ten 
eishcicen) Gare S¢ou dx; -7i€lSos/ixab, ry popdayy 
ev exeiv eivat, oie ev wc) Kapdia TO Tod Brink i 
Kal dAAws 8 dtomos Kal mracparias 6 18 Aébyos. 
aAXa. pay Kat 76 év T@ o7réppare evOds evuTdpyew 

35 Te pdpiov Tod Caov 7 asia ra ii eire 

Syaer-yoy movciy TaAAa elite jun, GdUvaTov, et may 
eK leanip teats Kal yovijs ylyverat, Onion: yap 6 bru 
bd7d Tod TO o7épya. eb iia be 2 “éyéveto, €lrep 
edOds eVUNSR XE GAAd. oréppa Set yevéeobau Tpo- 
TEpov, Kal TOOT epyov TOU yEevv@vTos. obbev apa 
olov Te Loptov brdpyew. odK dpa. éyeu TO Tovoby 
Td. HOpia ev ait@. adda py ov8” ew a avayien | be 
Tovtwy eva Oarepov. 13a 

EE gina am, rabra Adew" tows yap Tu ray 
clpnucver early ody dmdoby, olov m@s Tore 76 
Tob e€w odK sudexene ld EoTt Mev vép ws 
evdexerat, €or. 8 ws ov.’ 7d pev oov 70 oneppia 

1 acted 5 ; velit aattatlees Platt. 

@ As argued already, 734 a 2 ff. 
148 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

- aecount of B which jis next to it, or is it rather the 
ease that B is formed. after A? ~I mean, for instance, 
not that the heart, once it is formed, fashions the 
liver, and then the liver fashions something. else ; 
_ but that the one is formed after the other [just as a 
man is formed after a child], not by it. The reason 

_ of this is that, so far as the things formed by nature 

or by human art are concerned, the formation of 
that which is potentially is brought. about by that 

_ which is i actuality; so that the Form, or con- 

formation, of B would have to be contained in Ay 
e.g., the Form of the liver would have to be in the 
heart—which is absurd.' And there are other ways 
too in which the theory is absurd and fondly in- 
vented. But besides, for any part of the animal 
or plant to be present from the outset ready formed 
within the semen or seed, whether it has the power 
to fashion the other parts or not—even this is impos- 
sible if everything is formed out of semen or seed ; 
because it is plain that it was formed by that which | 
fashioned the semen if it is present within the semen 
from the outset ; but semen must be formed before 
{any part), and that is the business of the parent. 
_ Therefore no part can be present within the semen. 
Therefore it does not contain in itself that which 
fashions the parts. And yet this cannot be external 
to the semen either*: ‘and it must be either ex- 
ternal to it or inside it. 

__ Well, we must endeavour to solve this difficulty. 
“Maybe there is some:statement of ours, made without 
qualification, which ought to be qualified : ¢.g., if we 
ask, in what sense exactly is it impossible for the parts 
to be formed by something external? we see that 
‘in one sense it is possible, though in another it is not. 

4 149 

| 2) A NARISTOTLE) rasa 

734 b 
Aéyew 7 i ad’ od 70 ome ppiary: odbev diageper exer 

al Kimow ev €avT® Hv exetvo exives. tie 

OTrav. Tt Koon, TOV "Bates ise pa vexeuavor 
yeyveras! evepyei. @orrep’ obv® ev Tots adroparos, 
TpoTov ev Tia eKeivo KwVeEt ovx amTopevov viv 
15 oudevds, dupa juevov Herron, opotws (Be) wat &r6)° 
ad’ ob TO oméepua i TO movjoay TO omeppa, Gif 
pLevov pe TLWOS,. odx dmrropevoy. 3° éru- Tpdmov be 
Twa 2 evodca Kivysis, WomTEp 7) ehh het = hia 
oiktavy i uae | 
“Ore pev obv gore Tu 6 move, obx oes 88 . 
as Tdd€ TL, odd’ evuTdpxor* ais teredcopevov To 
mp@tov, SiAov. 
20 Ilds dé more Exacrov yiyvetan, ured ey Bes 
AaBeiv, apynv tromoapévovs mp@rov mer ott doa 

1 xuweira coni. A.-W. Ppa = 
® xabamep PS, om. Z. *' secl. ‘ASW.’ 4 <ro> Peck: 7 
6 sic A.-W.: obSe drapyov P: 088’ evumapye vulg. 

* Tt will be noticed that the passage which follows sounds 
surprisingly modern ; this is largely due to the great emphasis 
which Aristotle here gives to the réle played by the Efficient 
(or Motive) Cause.—See however App. B § 5. 

> Cf. 74169; and G. & C. II, chh. 10 and 11.” At Mech. 
848 a, there is a description of the mechanism bys which these 
may have been worked. ; 

© xwetra (** is set in movement ”’) has been s ested for 
ylyverar (“comes to be’’). But ,perhaps ylyve au evepy 
is the ,inceptive form of ¢efvac evepyeia, as in the ire 
ovros evepyeia, line 21 below. 

150 

; GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

ENow it makes no difference whether we say “ the 
. semen ” or “ that from which the semen comes,” in 
so far as the semen has within itself the movement 
which the generator set going. “And it is possible 
_that A should move B, and B move C, and that the 
process should be like that of the “ miraculous ”’ 
automatic puppets ’: the parts of these automatons, 
even while at rest, have in them somehow or other 
a potentiality, and ‘when some external agency sets 
_the first part in movement, then immediately the 
adjacent part comes to be‘ im actuality. The cases 
then are parallel: just as with the automaton (1)-in 
one way it is the external agency which is causing 
the thing’s movement—viz., not by being in contact 
with it anywhere now, but by having at one: time 
been in contact with it, so too that from which the 
semen originally came, or that which fashioned the 
semen, (causes the embryo’s movement) ¢—viz., not 
by being in contact with it still, but by having once 
been in contact with it at some point ; (2) in another 
way, it is the movement resident within (which 
causes it to move), just as the activity of building | 
causes the house to get built.¢ 
It is clear by now that there is something which 
fashions the parts of the embryo, but that this agent 
is not by way of being a definite individual thing,’ 
nor is it present in the semen as something already 
perfected to begin with. 
__ To answer the question, How exactly is each of 
the parts formed? we must take first of all as our 
' * i.¢., development ; see Introd. §§ 47 ff. 
_ * Cf. above, 730 b 8. 
f rode 71: cf. Met. 1030 a 7 76 rd8€ 7 Tails ovotas priexee 
povov. A 7dde zt is often equated with an odoia. Also ef. 

P.A. 641 b 31 yévecis pév yap 76 oépya, odcia 8é 76 7édos. 
151 

‘(ARISTOTEE)) 44 Svat) 

734 b 
poe. ylyverat 7) TEXYD, or evepyeia dvros yiveras 

ex Too Suvdyie, TowovTov. TO pev ody o7éppa 
TowovTov, Kal axe Kijow Kal apyny Touadray, 
Wore Tavoperns' Tihs Kwhoews yivecbau EKacTov 
25 TOV “ popiew Kat ewbyov. od yap eoTu ‘mpéoworrov 
ju) €xov ubuynv, odde adpé, aAAa Plapevre Opeve- 
pws AexOjoer ar TO Hey elvat mpooumor, 70. be 
odpé, dorep Kav €t éyiyvero Awa. 7; U7 Edhwa. apa. 
dé Ta Cuovopeph yiverau Kal Ta dan fe Kal 
@omep ovd’ av méAexvv ovd" a\Xo Spyavov pr- 
cayev av movjoat TO Tp povoy, ovTWws © ote 7054 
30 odde xetpa. Tov avTov dé TpdTTOV OvdE apne Kal 
yap TavTns épyov Ti é€otw. okdAnpa prev odv Kal 
padakda Kal yAloypa Kat Kpadpa, Kal 60a adda 
to.abra® wdOn brdpye. Tots epupdyous poptots, bep- 
pots Kat wvypdrns Toujcevev av, Tov. de Adyov @ 
ey TO [Lev capt 70 5° daTobv, ovKETL, GAN’ 7 Kimous 
35 ) a0 TOO ETE. Too Evrehexeiey’ évros 6 éort 
duvaper TO* €& ob yiveTal, Wamrep Kal emi TOV ywo- 

1 quieverit 5: Avopévys coni. Platt. | 
2 rovadra P, om. 

373. Y: 4 vulg.: om. P, A.-W,, Platt. 

iw 

« Cf. below, 734 b 36 and 735 a 4. Also see Introd. 
§§ 34 ff. 

» i.e, the principle of movement. uM} 

© If the text is sound, this can only refer to the original 

‘movement’ imparted by the generating parent whi 
Mess roc the semen; and this would be comparable with 
the initial movement imparted to the automaton mentior 
aboye. 

152 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

starting-point this principle. Whatever is formed 
either by Nature or by human Art, say X, is formed 
by something which is X in actuality out of something 
which is X potentially. Now semen, and the move- 
ment and principle ? which it contains, are such that, 
as the moyement ceases® each one of the parts 
gets formed and acquires Soul. (I add “ acquires 
Soul,” because there is no such thing as face, or flesh 
either, without Soul in it ; and though they are still 
said to be “face”’ and “ flesh”’ after they are dead, 
these terms will be names merely (“ homonyms ”’),? 
just as if the things were to turn into stone or 
wooden ones.) And the formation of the “uniform” 
parts® and of the instrumental parts goes on simul- 
taneously. And as in speaking of an axe or any 
other instrument, we should not say that it was 
made solely by fire, so we should not say this about 
a foot or a hand (in the embryo), nor, similarly, of 
flesh either, because this too is an instrument with 
a function to perform. As for hardness, softness, 
toughness, brittleness and the rest of such qualities 
which belong to the parts that have Soul in them 
—heat and cold may very well produce these, but 
they certainly do not produce the logos’ in direct 
consequence of which one thing is flesh and another 

_ bone; this is done by the movement which derives 

from the generating parent, who is in actuality what 

_ the material out of which the offspring is formed is 
_ potentially.. Exactly the same happens with things 

# See note on 726 b 24 (and 721 a 3). They have merely 
the name in common with the living face and flesh, but not 
the essential nature. Cf. line 34 below. 

* See Introd. § 19. Note that the non-uniform parts are 
here called the instrumental parts. 

7 See Introd. § 10. 

153 

\/ARISTOTLE ! T AR VAD 

734 b 
pevev Kata TEéexvnv- oKAnpov pev yap Kat ‘padaxov 

735 a TOV GHD pee Tovet TO Bepudy Kal TO “poxpov, ada 
Eigos 7 y share, 4 TOV geyanany, éxovea, Néyov Tov 
Ths TeXUNS. 7 yep neni apxy Kat €ldos Tod 
Pit eile adn’ év ohn 7" S€ Tis ag pete 
ev avT® ad étépas ovoa guoews Ths éxovons 76 

5 eldos é€ sepyitial motepov 5° age poy TO oTéppa 
7) ov; 6 adros Adyos Kal arept TOY po. obre 
yap pox ev dAAw DPOSEED EOTOL ay ev exeivyp 
0d y° €arlv, odte pdpiov ora pr) petéxov GAX’ 7 
ioc meet Sop TeOve@ros plaids. ” tps 
oby dru Kat exer Kal €o7e Suvdper. eyyvtépw Se 

10 Kal Toppwrépw ado adrob evdéxerar elvar Suvder, — 
donep 5 Kabediwv yewpéerpys tod eypnyopdros: 
Toppwrépw, Kat obtos TOO Oewpobvros. Tadrns pev 
obv ovfev pdpiov. aitiov Tis yevéoews, aAda TO 
mparov kwihcav ewhev. od0ev yap abrd éavro 
yerva: drav Se yévnta, adfer 4dn adro éavtd. 

15 OudmEep. Tp@rov Te nipnlerags Kal ody se mdavTa. 
TobTo dé Apia gta mp@rov, oO wen Soha 
apyny part: Eire yap dutov elite C@ov, 6 onaiass TORRE 
maow wrdpye. TO. Opentixdy. tobro 8’ €att TO 

@ See Introd. § 11. ®» See above, 734 b 25. 
© See note, 726 b 24. 
@ The argument now resumes from line 4 above... 
¢ Of. De anima 416 b 16, and context, 

154 

[ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

formed by the processes of the arts. Heat and cold 
soften and harden the iron, but they do not produce 
the sword; this is done by the moyement of the 
instruments employed, which contains the logos of the 
Art; since the Art is both the principle 7 and Form 
of the thing which is produced; but it is located 
elsewhere than in that thing, whereas Nature’s 
movement is located in the thing itself which is 
produced, and it is derived from another natural 

_ organism which possesses the Form zn actuality. As 

for the question whether the semen possesses Soul or 
not, the same argument? holds as for the parts of 
the body, viz.. (a) no Soul will be present elsewhere 
than in that of which it is the Soul; (6) no part of 
the body will be such in more than name unless it 
has some Soul in it (e.g., the eye of a dead person). 
Hence it is clear both that semen possesses Soul, and 
that it is Soul, potentially...And there are varying 
degrees in which it may be potentially that which it 
is capable of being—it may be nearer to it or further 
removed from it (just as a sleeping geometer is at a 
further remove than one who is awake, and a waking 
one than one who is busy at his studies). So? then, 
the cause of this process of formation is not any part 
of the body, but the external agent which first set 

_ the movement going—for of course nothing gener- 

ates itself,* though as soon as it has been formed a 

_thing makes itself grow. That is why one part is 
formed first, not all the parts simultaneously. And 
the part which must of necessity be formed first is 
the one which possesses the principle of growth : be 
they plants or animals, this, the nutritive, faculty is 
present in all of them alike (this also is the faculty 

t Cf. below, 735 a 22, 740 a 19 ff. 
155 

ot. ARISTOTLE ||) * 0. 0) 

= yevynTiKov erepoe ofov adrd* TobTo yap mavros 
dvce. Tedetov & Spyov kat Cov Kat durod. i dvdy a 

20 dé dua. 7dde, OTe Gray Te WEIS abédvecbar avd- 

yen. eyeévynoe pev Toivuy TO ouvevupov, olov 
avOpwrros abo ptparov): ee ert dé bv éav7o8. avTo! 

” ” or 2 ord) Sate | 
dpa Tt ov avfe.” tf 89 & tM Kal TobTO, mparov,: 

TooTo dvdiyacy Li ai mpAtov. Gar’ i Kapdia 
T™p@Tov €v Tet cepts ylyverat, ev Be! rots e pave 
25 gated TO Tavtn avddoyov, éK radrys av «¢ ely, 4 
“xn Tots XIN tots 6° dAdo €x, Tod dvddoyor. 
Tt. pev obv eotiv aitiov as 4px) Tijs wept Exa- 
oTov Yeveseias, Kwodv mp@tov Kat Srpwovpyody, 
eipynTar mpos TA Supronnsyrs, mpoTepov;, 
II 30. Ilepi dé, Tis Tod onéppatros dvccws. dmophoevev 
av Tis. TO yap oT€éppa eEépyerar mev Ek TOD tdou 

sh kat Nevkov, yuxdpevov Se yiveras bypov 

woTrep vdwp, KL TO Xpopa VOaTOS. aromov Sy) a ay 
7 syisghd Se 
1 €avro Peck : auto vulg.. apa 

2 €aurd . . . avfer| é €orw dpa te 6 avbter Ze say, 
3 ap@rovom. PS: A.-W. coni. & 7 Tod70, wana snap 

® Of. De anima 415 a 26 ff., and for identity of nutritive 
and generative faculty, 416 a 18 ff., and note on brs si ~ 
below. 

> See note on 721 a 3. 

¢ This seems to be the meaning of this phrase : : ef. the 
twice-repeated remark above, that once a thing has 
brought into being, it makes itself grow : Aristotle now says, 

now that it is making itself grow, it is something—but 
what ? Some one thing—it is so far just that one thing whi 
is able to cause lies which contains the principle of 

156 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1-1. 

of generating another creature like itself, since this 
_ is a function which belongs to every animal and plant 
_ that is perfect in its nature). The reason why this 
_ must of necessity be so is that once a thing has been 
formed, it must of necessity grow. And though it 
_ was generated by another thing bearing the same 
name ® (e.g.,a man is generated by a man), it grows 
by means of itself. So then, since it makes itself 
_ grow, it is something °: and if indeed.it is some one 
thing, and if it is this first.of all, then this must of 
hecessity be formed first. Thus, if the heart is 
formed first in certain animals (or the part analogous 
to the heart, in those animals which have no heart), 
we may suppose that it is the heart (or its analogue) 
which supplies the principle.? 

The queries raised earlier have now been dealt 
with. We have answered the question, What is the 
cause (in the sense of principle) of the generation of 
each individual—what is that which first sets it in 
movement and fashions it ? 

_» A puzzle which may now be propounded is, What II 

is the nature of Semen? Semen when it leaves the semen. 
animal is thick and white, but when it cools it becomes 

fluid like water and is of the colour of water. This 
nutritive Soul, viz., the heart’ And that is why the heart is 

the first,thing to be formed.” Cf. 740 a 21 (where. there is no 
need to alter the text). 

steal 

a 

e process of formation or generation (of which the 
py is the agent), goes on gradually—thus, the first part 

‘the Soul to be formed, generated, or realized, is the part 
which produces growth (76 @pezzixév), and with it the part of 
the body in which that part of the Soul resides, viz., the 
heart. (See 763 b 25, n.) 

157 

ARISTOFLE OF PASH AND 

735 , 
* Bde evev* 0d yap taxtverat vdwp Oepud, Tro 8 

owblev ex Ocpyod e&dpyerar maxv, puxspevor be 

vee Dypen: katro. miyvural ye ta dSaTabSq: 

35 TO 5€ omépya ov coring rity) év Tots ma&yous 
d7aiOpiov, adn’ Higa hth cs b1d Tob évayriov 
maxuvlév. GAAd pay ob8’ dro Bepyod rraxsvecbat 

735 b rity names doa yap yijs wheiov exer, Tatra ovv- 
ioratar cal maydverau éfdpeva, ofov Kal 70 ydAa. 

Edel. OvV puxpusvon ORR ASRD TAG, vov 8 odbev 

vee nic gird aAAa mév gre bdwp. a at 

obv amopla avrn éorlv. «i aes yap ddwp, TO vdwp 
50d dpaiverar PRXGEVON id Tod Oeppod, 6 > 
e€épyerau Seay Kal ri ks Kal ék eee Tod 
owpatos: et 8 eK ys’ 7 pucrov vijs Kat Baros, 
obk eer bypov wav yivecOar Kal Bwp. 7H ov 
TavTa TO. srg sce hill plaamre= 5 od yap bannge 
Ss To e€ bOaTos Kal bec ast vis shy 
10 dypov, GAAd Kal To €€ VdaTos Kai TUSHAR TOR: oiov 
Kai 6 adpos yiverar maxvrepos Kat AevKds, Kal 
dow av éAarrovs Kat adnAdrepae at icity 
@ot, TOGOUTW. Kal AguNeaSpnS Kal anidipeir spas 6 
OyKOS is beh 76 8 avro Kal To €Aatov mdoxer 
fi grr ha yap T@ siphon og pps 800 Kat 
15 70 saiundcraariags maxvrepov yiverar, Tod €vdvTos 
ddatrwdouvs bd Tod Oeppob Svaxpwopévou Kal y- 

1 ei 3 yas P, A.-W. 
158 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. nm. 

_ may seem strange, because water is not thickened by 

heat, yet semen is thick when it leaves the inside of 
the animal, which is hot, and becomes fluid when it 
cools. Moreover, watery substances freeze, but semen 
does not freeze when exposed to frost in the open air; 
it becomes fluid, which suggests that it was heat that 
thickened it. And yet itis not very probable that it 
is thickened by heat, because it is substances that 
contain a large proportion of earth which “ set ” and 
thicken when boiled—milk, for example ; hence ‘it 
ought to solidify when it cools, but in fact it does not 
solidify at all; the whole of it becomes fluid like water. 

This thenis the puzzle. Suppose that semen is water. 
_ Water is never observed to be thickened by heat; 

whereas semen is both thick and hot, and the body 

_ it comes from is hot. Or suppose it.consists of earth, 
_ or is a mixture of earth and water. In that case the , , 
_ whole of it ought not to become fluid and turn to 
_ water. Perhaps then after all we have not. distin- 

guished all the cases that occur. Other fluids thicken 

_ beside those which are composed of water and earthy 

ames 

matter, viz., those composed of water and pneuma,? 

_ for instance, foam, which becomes thicker, and white ; 

and the’smaller and more microscopic the bubbles 
are, the whiter and more compact is the appearance 
of the bulk. Oil behaves in the same way; it 
thickens when it gets mixed with pneuma; and that 

‘is why <oil) when it becomes whiter is thickening, 

_ since the watery substance in it is separated out from 

* Pneuma is defined below (736 a1) as “ hot air”; see, 

; however, 736 b 35 ff. below. Rather than attempt a mis- 

g or inadequate translation of the word (¢.g., spirit, 

breath), I have decided to keep the original term, as else- 
_wWhere. See further, Appendix B. 

159 

735 b 

ARISTOTLE) (i A540) 

vopLevov mVEvpLaTos. Kal 4 poddBdawa peyvopevn 

ddare Kat’ edaiw && dAiyou Te moAdv OyKov Trovet 
Kal e€ dypob oridbpov Kal €K peAavos Aevicov. 
airvov 8’ ore eyKarapiyverat mvedpa, Oo Tov TE 

20 Oyicov Tout Kal Tay Acudrnra Siagaiver, aomep 

ev TH adp@ kat TH xuovi Kal ‘yap 7 xXuesv €orw 
adpés. Kal avro TO dup eAaicn pyvipevov 
yiveTat TaxXd Kal AevKOV: Kad yap v0 THs “Tplipews 
eyKaraxheterar mvebpa, Kat adTo TO Sab it 

€l 
25 mvedpa. Tov: €oTt yap ovTE yas oure S8aros w sxe 

mvevpatos TO Aurapdv. 10 Kal emt TH VdaTL 
emimroAdler 6 yap ev alT® By anp, Womep ev ay- 
yelw, déper avw Kal eémimoAdler Kal aitios THs 
KoupoTntos €oTw. Kal ev Tots ydyeow Se Kal 
mdyos Taxyvverar TO EAaLov, miyyvuTas 8 ov dia 

30 pev yap Gepudorynra od miyyvuTat (6 yap anp Geppov 

Kal amnKrov), dia de 70 ovvioracbat avrov kal 
moKvodobat [worep|* dd Tod pixous Trax UTEpov 
yiverau 76 €Aaov. Sia ta’ras Tas airias kal TO 
o7repjia. eowbev prev e€€pyerar oruppov Kat Acukov, 
bm0 THs evTos DeppdryTos . Bibi Tord éyxov Bep- 

kal. PX: 7 «ai vulg. * Bdwp Ps Bap 7d, vulg, 
* eth A. Ww. : ; fortasse adrov muKvoorat [Somep. . . €Aacor] 
scribendum (haec om. £). lac. post donep stat. Sus. 

ty 

* This is no doubt galena (lead sulphide), the chief ore 
found in the Attic mines at Laurium, although these were ° 
more famous for their silver output. The reference to the 
mixing of the ore with water and oil, which heretofore seems 
to have passed unnoticed, must imply an early process of 
“ flotation,” a, stage which follows the mechani crushing 
of the ore and precedes the metallurgical extracting of the 
metal, its object being to separate the metalliferous from 
the non-metalliferous constituents of the ore by means of the - 
production of a froth. The first practically successful — 

- 160 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. nm. 

ji it by the heat and becomes pneuma. Lead ore," too, 
_ when it gets mixed with water and oil, increases its 
bulk, _and whereas it was fluid and black it becomes 
F thick and coherent. and white. The reason is. that 
ma gets mixed in with it, and this produces the 
increase of bulk and lets the whiteness show through, 
precisely as it does with foam, and also with snow (be- 
cause snow too is afoam). Even water itself when it 
gets mixed with oil becomes thick and white, the reason 
being that some pneuma is left behind in it owing to 
the friction of mixing, and also that oil itself contains 
a good deal of preuma—for of course shininess is a 
quality of pneuma, not of earth or water. And that 
too is why oil floats on the surface of water; air is 
contained.,in it,.as though ina vessel, and this air ° 
buoys it up and causes it to float ; thus-the air is 
_ the cause of its lightness. Further, in time of cold 
- and frost, oil thickens, but does not freeze. Its 
failure to freeze is due to its heat—hecause the air 
is hot and is impervious to frost. But it thickens 
because the air is coagulated and compressed [as] by 
the cold. These reasons explain the behaviour of 
semen as well. Itis coherent and white when it comes 
forth from within, because it contains a good deal of 
hot preuma owing to the internal heat of the animal. 

attempt at eaien | in modern times was made by the brothers 
Elmore at the Glasdir gold-mine in. Wales (patent 008), 
_ though izgestions for the use of oil had been made. by 
ha William aynes of Holywell some years earlier (patent 
Ul 1860). For details see S., J. Truscott, Text-book of Ore- 
_ dressing ; T. A. Rickard, Man and. Metals, id., Concentration 
_ by Flotation (which includes two essays on the flotation: of 
_ galena at Broken Hill, N.S.W.). The term o7gpds. corre- 
E if exactly.to the “‘ thick coherent froth *? mentioned by. 
ruscott (op. cit. 392, etc.).—For a full account of the mines 
at Laurium see E. Ardaillon, Les Mines du Laurion (1897). 

G 161 

ee 

‘ARISTOTLE |!) 1 10 

735 b 
35 pov, e€eABov" dé érav amonveton TO Oeppov Kat 
6 ap vxOF, dy pov yiverau | kat péAav> AetrreTae 
yap TO Bowp Kal el Tt puucpov yedes, donep év 

préypare, Kal ev 7@ oTmEpLare Enpawvopevy. < 

736 a "Kort pev ovv TO omepjia Kowvov TVvevLaTos Kat 

vdaTos, TO dé mvedud €oTu Fepuos ap: bud Aa ad f 
TH pvouw, OTL ef ddaros. Kraotas yap 6 vi- 

tos a TeEpl TOO omépyatos TOV hepevren. ele 

pyKe, pavepos eoTw eevopevos. dno yap ovrw 

5 oKAnpiveatar Enpauvopevov wore yivecbau Tce pep 

dprovov. Tobro 8 od yiveras: paAdov pe yap 

ETEpoV érépou oTépa. yewdéoTepov avayKatov 

elvan, Kal pddvora, Tovobrov doous o0Ad yeddes 

dmdpxeu KaTd TOV oyKov TOV TOO GwWpaTos. maxd 

d€ Kal AevKov dia TO pepiyOar veda. Kal yap 

/ ? A / / ¢€ \ } 

10 Aeukdv eort TO oTépya mavrwv “Hpddoros yap ovie 

dAnOA Aéyer, pdokev péAawvay elvat TH TOV 

Aiforwy yov7y, worrep avayKatov oy TOV Ty 

xpoav peAdveny elvan mdvra péAava, Kat rade? Opav 

Kat Tods oddvtas adT@v ovtas A€evKoUs. aitvov be 

ths AevKoTHTOs TOD aTéppwatos Ott eaTiv 7» youn 

15 adpos, 6 5 adpos AevKdv, Kai pddvta TO €& 

1 efeOov Peck: e&eAPovros vulg. 

@ See 725 a 15 ff. 

» Ktesias of Knidos in Caria, a eionitetiiisolay? of Xeno ri 
belonged to an old medical family, and was physician to the 
Persiari king Artaxerxes Mnemon (405-362 B.c.). His chief 
work was his Ilepouxd, in 23 books, containing the history 
of the East down to 398-397 3B.c. Most of his zoological 
matter, however, seems to have been contained in his *Ivécxa, 
judging from this reference and three others in the History 
of Animals. \Abridgements of both these works by Photius 

are extant. © Herodotus IIT. 101.) — 
4 The view that semen was foam was held by Diogenes of 

162 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. n. 

Later, when: it has lost its heat by ‘evaporation 
and the air has cooled, it becomes fluid and. dark, 
because the water and whatever tiny quantity of 
earthy matter it may contain stay behind in. the, 
semen as it solidifies, just as happens with phlegma.*. 
. Semen, then, is a compound of preuma and water 
Carcass being hot air), and that is why it is fluid in 

nature ; it is made of water. Ktesias of Knidos ” ia 

is obviously mistaken in his statement about the 
semen of elephants: he says that it gets so hard 
when it solidifies that it becomes like amber. It does 
not. It is, of course, true that one semen must of 
necessity be earthier than another, and the earthiest 

will be in those animals which, for their bodily bulk, - 
contain a large amount of earthy matter ; but semen . 

is thick and white because there is pneuma mixed with 
it. .Whatis more, it is white in alleases:, Herodotus ‘ 
is incorrect when he says that the semen of Ethiopians 
is black, as though everything about a person, with a 
black skin were bound to be. black—and this too in 
spite of their teeth being white, as he could see for 
himself. The cause of the whiteness of semen is that 
it is foam,’ and foam is white, the whitest being that 

Apollonia ; see Vindicianys, $ 1°(Diels, Vorsokr.s 64 B. 6) 
Alexander. -Amator veri (=DXadrnOms) .. . « libro, primo De 
semine spumam sanguinis eius essentiam dixit Diogenis 
placitis consentiens; and cf. § 3. See Jaeger’s discussion 
of the subject in Diokles von Karystos, 198-211. Cf. also 
Hippocrates, 2. yovijs xrA. 1 (vii. 470 Littré) dwoxpivera: a6 Tod 
Ms adpedvros 76 tcxuporarov. In modern times a Similar 
idea has been put forward, ¢.g., by Biitschli ( Untersuchungen 
iiber a a Schiumeund das Protoplasma, Leipzig, 
1892), who “ thought of protoplasm as a foam, or rather as 
an emulsion composed of two liquids, one in the form of drop- 
lets, the other as lamellae [7.¢., films] between the droplets ” 
(Heilbrunn, An Outline of General Physiology, 1938, p. 25). 

163 

~ 

a f 
(ARISTOTLE) | PASIMNO 
736 a > / 7 / ‘ M4 ~ 
ohuyioreny jovykeipevov popiwy Kal otra pKxpav 
womep éxdorns aopdrou Tijs moppodvyos ovons, 
Orrep ovpBatver Kal emi Tod BdaTos Kal TOD eda 
puyvupevwy Kal i ei Kabdzrep' are On) 
TpOTeEpov. 
"Eouxe be ovde TOUS dpxatous AavOdvew , dpbdns 

207) Tod OTEppLaTos oboa pda: TH yoov kupiav 
Geov Tijs pews amd ris duvdpews Tavrns 
™poonyopevoay. mt renee 

“H pev oby aitia THs Acxfetons a droptas elpyTa, 

pavepov d€ dte dia TodT’ ovde TOT 6 yap 
anp darnkros. 

Il  Tovrov. & EXO[EvOV €orw" dmopfoa Kab eineiy, 

25 et TOV mpoieweverv els TO Ondv younv pnBev popuor 
éore TO etoeAGov Tob yeyvopevov KunpaTos, 7700" 
TpémEeTaAl TO owparddes abrod, elmep epyalerat TH 
duvapet TH evodon ev adre. Svopioat be det md- 
TEpov peraAap Paver TO OUVLOTaLEVOV ev TO Orher 
amo Tob eioeAPovros Tt 7) obbev, Kat mept 

30 Kal” av Aéyerau Céov (CHov 8 earl Kara To ‘peprov 
THs wWuyis TO aicOnruxdy) mOrepov _eveTidpxet 7 
oTreppare Kal TO. KUNLATL 7 ov, kal 70ev. ouTE 
yap ws ayfuxov av ein Tus 70 Kina. KOTO. mdvra. 
TpOTov €oTEpnLevov is ovdev yap “rrov rd. Te 

1 éorw xai PSY, Galen. not Btf. * * 8€P: re vule 

* Lit., “called after this substance (dynamis), é Aphrodite, 
after aphros, Cf. Galen, 7. onépparos I. 5 (iv. 531 Kiihn) ; 
and Clem, Paedag. I. 6, 48 (Diels, Vorsokr.? 64 A 24) tues 
be kal 70 oméppa tod Cwov adpov elvat tod aipatos Kat’ o 
ciav bnoriBevra..... evredber yap 6 ’Aro\Mwwarns Avoyévns 74 
adpodiova xexAjoba Bovderat, Cf. preceding note.) j 

® See note on meaning of «vnua, Introd. § 56. 5. 

164 

—— —— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. u.-111. 

which consists of the tiniest particles, so small that 
each individual bubble cannot be detected by the eye. 
An instance of such a foam, mentioned earlier, is 
that uced by the mechanical mixing of water 
and oi 

- ‘That the natural substance of semen is foam-like 
was, so it seems, not unknown even in early days ; 
at any rate, the goddess who is supreme in matters of 
sexual intercourse was called after foam.* 

We have now given the reason which solves the 
puzzle that was stated. And this also shows, inci- 
dentally, why semen does not freeze : it is because 
air is impervious to frost. 

“The next puzzle to be stated and solved is this. III 
Take the ‘case of those groups of animals in which Sem +n4 
semen is emitted into the female by the male. Sup: 
posing it is true that the:semen which is so intro- 
duced is not an ingredient in the fetation ° which is 
formed, but performs its function simply by means , 
of the dynamis © which it contains. Very well; if.so, 
what becomes of the physical part of it ? First of all 
we shall have to decide (a) whether that which takes 
shape within the female does or does not incorporate 
into itself any portion of that which was introduced 
(from the male) ; and (6) whether Soul—and it is in 
virtue of Soul that an animal has the name of 
“animal”: it is in fact in virtue of the sentient 

part? of Soul that it is an animal *—whether Soul is 

or is not in the semen and in the fetation to begin 
_ with, and if so where it comes from. No one, of 
course, would maintain that the fetation is quite 
without Soul, completely devoid of life in every sense, 

® See also 726 b 18 ff., 727 b 15, 16, 738 b 12, and Bk. I, 
ch. 21. -# See Introd. § 43. ¢ See 732 a 13, n. 

165 

736 a 

736 b 

ARISTOPLE ())) 6) 440 

o7méppara Kal Ta KUHMOTE tov Cow Ci rv 

* 35 puray, Kal yovysa, péxpe Twos eoTw. Sri pev obv 

THY Openruiy éxovat proxy, pavepov (60° bru Be 
TavTnv Tp@Tov dvaryraisy € éort AaBeiv, é« TOY 7 rept 
puxiis Suwpuopeveny ev dMous pavepov)* mpoidyra 
dé, Kal rv atoOnricny, Kal? jv C@ov.. od yap apa. 
yiverau Cov, Kal dvOpemos. obde (Gov Kai trmos, 
opotwns dé Kal emi TOV adAwv Sper dorarov' yap 
yiverat 70 Téos, 708? iidv €oTL TO éxdoTou 'f Tis 

5 yevéoews TéAOS. 810 Kal rept vob, more eal 70s 

perahayBdver Kal m0bev Ta, peTexovTa tadrns. THIS 

apis, <xXeu 7 dmoplay mAcloTyV,. Kal Set _Tpo- 
Oupctobau. Kara Svvamw AaBev cal «al Scov 
evoeXeT au. say yet be tin oe} nono 

Thy pe oov sehen sing Ta _oméppara: Kal 
Ta KUnpaTa Ta (a)xeptora’ dihov 6 OTe Suvdpet ev 
éyovra Beréov, evepyeta 8° odk exovra, mp 7 
Kadamep Ta xewprldjiera. TOV KUnpaTaOY exee Thy 
Tpodayy Kal move TO Ths, Tovadrns duns & epyov : 
Tp@TOV . [ev, Yop, dav. €ouKe oy TO inoue 

(1% borarov P: dorepov vulg. Fert 
2. Buss: : évra’ ywpuera Platt. 3 of ‘d Plat, ) 

irs 
r 

* -€.9., wind-eggs, Bk. III.) tht: 

* De anima, Bk. Il, ch..4; and see 735.a 13 ff, anaes 
| ¢,These are two instances of the rule that there are ‘definite 
stages in the development or formation of living’ ‘things. 
Nutritive Soul (the mark of a living thing) is acquired before 
sentient Soul (the mark of an animal), just as the formation 
of an animal precedes the formation of any particular species 
of animal. ‘Cf. von Baer’s “‘ biogenetic law,’” that the char- 
acter of the class is acquired before that of, the genus, and that 
of the genus before that of the species, (K. E. von Baer, 

166 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. m1. 

for the semens and the fetations of animals are 
just as much alive as plants are, and up to a point 
they are fertile.* Thus it is clear that they possess 
nutritive Soul (vide my remarks on Soul in another 
treatise > for an explanation of why nutritive Soul 
must of necessity be acquired first). It is while they 
develop that they acquire sentient Soul as well, in 
virtue of which an animal is an animal—lI say, “ while 
they develop,” for it is not the fact that when an 
animal is formed at that same moment a human 
being, or a horse, or any other particular sort of 
animal is formed, because the end or completion is 
formed last of all, and that which is peculiar to each 
thing is the end of its process of formation.° That, 
is why it is a very great puzzle to answer another 
question, concerning Reason. At what. moment, 
and in what manner, do those creatures which have 
this principle of Reason acquire their share in it, and 
where does it come from? This is a very difficult 
problem which we must endeavour to solve, so far as it 
may be solved, to the best of our power. 

_ As regards nutritive Soul, then,? it is clear that we 
must posit that semens and fetations which are not 
separated (from the parent) possess it potentially, 
though not in actuality—t.e., not until they begin to 
draw the nourishment to themselves and perform the 
function of nutritive Soul, as fetations which get 
separated * (from the parent) do; for to begin with 
it seems that all things of this sort live the life of a 

Uber Entwicklungsgesch ichte der Thiere, Beobachtung und 
Reflewion (1828), i. 224, Scholion V (1) Dass.das Gemeinsame 
einer gréssern Thiergruppe sich friiher im Embryo bildet, als 
das Besondere, et seqq.) 

# The solution begins by resuming the argument from 
736 a 32-34. * e.g., seeds of plants. 

167 

. ’ 

ARISTOTLE)! PAD 
736 b 

dutod Biov. €éopevws dé SijAov ort Kal rept THs 

aicOnrucijs AcKréov poxiis Kal mepl TIS vonTuctis” 
15 méoas yap dvayKaiov Suvdper mpoTepov exe 7 

evepycta.. dvayxaiov be HTOL [1 ovoas mporepov 
eyyivecBae méoas, i) maoas , ot Sa ee Tas 
prev. Tas Oe La}, Kal eyyiveoBau va DAN fe “pa 
etaeAfovoas €v T@ TOU dppevos oirepbarty y €v- 
Tabla pev éxeiBev eAfovoas, ev d€ 7 CPR ERE a 
20 Oipabev eyywopevas dmdoas 7 pndepiay 7 7). Tas pe 
Tas be PH.) OTe He Totyyy ovx. olov Te TaGas 
mpoimapxew, pavepov € eoTw ek TOV TowodTwv. dowry 
yap éorw dpyav" H evépyea owpatiKy, SfAov ort 
TavTas dvev owpLaTos addvarov dmdpxew, olov. Ba- 
dilew dvev modav: dare Kat Ovpabev elovevan 
25 advvarov: ovre yap avras Kal? adras €lovévat 
ofdv re dxwpiorovs oveas, or’ ev oopare elovevau 

hip 

1 apafewv coniecerunt A,-W. | rt ty lage 

® This elaborate scheme of possibilities i is not ahs so over- — 
whelming as it looks, though the argument would haye been 
more lucid if Aristotle had explicitly named the several sorts — 
of Soul involved. It will be seen, however, that of the first 
three possibilities, the last, (c), is the operative one; in fact, 
it is nutritive Soul, which the cnatertal ae the female (more 
specifically, the fetation) possesses (see 736 a 32 ff., 737 a 23 ff); 
thus it remains for the other two, sentient and rational Souls, 
to be supplied by the male (Aristotle explains in ch. 5 below 
that the reason why a fetation can grow yet is unable to 
develop fully into an animal is that it lacks sentient. Soul, 
which only the male can supply). Hence in the second series 
of possibilities it is again the last one, (¢), which is the operative 
one: sentient Soul is present inside the male (7.¢., the semen), 
and it remains that rational Soul comes into being imside the 
male (i.¢., the semen) from some outside source, for it alone 
is not affected by thé two considerations which preclude the 
entry from outside of the other parts of Soul, whose activity © 

168 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1m. 

plant. And it is clear we should follow a similar line 
also in our statements about sentient Soul and 
rational Soul, since a thing must of necessity possess 
every one of the sorts of Soul potentially before it 
possesses them im actuality. And necessity requires 
either (a) that none of them exists previously, and 
that they all come to be formed in (the fetation) ; or 
(6) that they are all there beforehand ; or (c) that 
some of them are there and some are not; and 
further, that they come to be formed in the material 
supplied by the female either (a) without having 
entered in the semen of the male or (6) after having 
so entered—that is, having come from the male, and 
if so, then that either (a) all of them or (6) none of 
them or (c) some of them come to be formed within 
the male from some outside source.* _Now the follow- 
ing considerations plainly show that they cannot all be 
present beforehand. Clearly, those principles whose 
activity is physical cannot be present without a 
physical body—there can, for example, be no walking 
without feet? ; and this also rules out the possibility 
of their entering from outside, since it is impossible 
either that they enter by themselves, because they 
are inseparable (from a physical body), or that they 
enter by transmission in some body, because the 
is essentially physical (see also below, 737 a 9 f.). Thus, 
sentient Soul, and a fortiori rational Soul, are supplied by 

the male, through the semen, to the material provided by 
_ the female. Aristotle does not, however, give any fuller 
solution than this to his own “very difficult puzzle’? how 
_and when rational Soul, which is thus supplied in a potential 
state by the male, is actualized in the offspring. 

» Aristotle takes the “ locomotive Soul,” the highest of the 
_ “ parts *’ or “ faculties ” of Soul apart from “ rational Soul,” 

and shows that this cannot enter by itself ; @ fortiori therefore 
none of the lower “ parts * can do so. 

169 

| ARISTOTLE) Th AU 4a 
736 b 

TO yap. ome ppuas. Trepitrwpa petapaddovons ie 

Tpopis € éoriv. Aeizerat 87)" Tov vody [.0vor | en 
evrevovevat Kat Oetov etvau povov" 0b8ey yap p at adrod 
Th evepyetg. KOWWVEL CWLATLKT) evepyeta. whet in tie 
30, Ildons pev obdv oxi Sdvapis | eTepov ouparos 
€oiKe KeKowwrynKevar Kal Oevorépov tTOv Kadov- 
peeveay orouxeleoy" Ws 8 Siapépovor Teese Te at 
dvyal Kal arysia adaray, obras Kat 4a Towadrn 
Suagéper puars. TAVTOV bey yap év To onéppart 
evuTsdpxet, OmEp Trovet yovepa, elvau 7a, OTepLara., 
35 TO Kadovpevor, Deppor. Totro 8 od mip odde . 
TOLAUTY Sdvapis eotw, aAAa TO eprrepthapBavd- 
pevov ev TO oméppare Kat év TO dbpdider media 
Kal 7 ev TO medpware pvots, avddoyor oboa - TO 
737 a TOV GoTpwV oToLyelw. d10 Trp Hey obBev ERY, ma 
C@ov,, ovde paiverar ouvioTdevov. éev* TUPOVPLEVOLS 
ovr’ ev dypots ovr ev Enpois odfev> 7%) dé Tob HAtov 
fepporns Kat » TOV Cawv od eit 1 SPL 

1 $1) Platt, Zeller, Btf.: S€ vulg. aw P: om. ae 

@ i.¢,, it is not-a body possessing . the parts . necessary in 
order to give effect to the activities involved, such as legs for 
walking. Cf. P.A. 641, b 31 yéveous pev yap 7d gee top: odota 
dé 70. TEAos. 

> Of. De anima 413.a 4 ff. iy 

¢ -Cf,, 762 a20. 4 See 736 a 131 ff. vith 

¢ This is the so-called. ‘ fifth element,” (é.¢., over and — 
above the four “ elements ”’ found in the sublunary regions, 
viz., earth, air, fire, and water), though Aristotle’s own name 
for it is “the first of the elements ” (rs mp&rov t&v arotxeto, 
De. caelo 298 b 6, 76 mpa@rov ada, 270 b 21), owing to its 
pre-eminent qualities. The arguments for its existence will 
be found in De caelo, Bk. 1; it is ungenerated, indestruct- 

170 

———. = 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. m1. 

semen is a residue of the nourishment that is under- 
going change.* It remains, then, that Reason alone 
enters in, as an additional factor, from outside; and 
that it alone is divine, because physical activity has 
nothing whatever to do with the activity of Reason.? 

_Now so far as we can see, the faculty of Soul of 
every kind has to do with some physical substance 
which is different from the so-called “ elements ” and 

_ more divine than they are; and as the varieties of 

Soul differ from one another in the scale of value, so 
do the various substances concerned with them differ 
in their nature. Im all cases the semen contains 
within itself that which causes it to be fertile—what 
is known as “hot ”’ substance,° which is not fire nor 
any similar substance, but the pneuma which is en- 
closed within the semen or foam-like stuff,? and the 
natural substance which is in the pneuma ; and. this 
substance is analogous to the element which belongs 
to the stars. That is why fire does not generate 
any animal,’ and we find no animal taking shape either 
in fluid or solid substances while they are under the 
influence of fire; whereas the heat of the sun? does 
effect generation, and so does the heat of animals, 

ible, a, divine (269 a 31 ff., 270.a 12 ff., 270 b 10 ff), Aris- 
totle claims that it was vaguely recognized by the. ancients, as 
is suggested by the name (aither) they gave to * * the upper- 
most ace” (70d 16 ff.) : amo Tob Dety ael Tov aidciov xpévov 
Oguevor THY exwvupiay ate. (Cf. Hippocrates, 7. capxav 2 
(viii. 584 Littré) Boxéet dé por 6 Kanéopev Geppdv, abdvarov TE 
b - ; Toro ow we eLexipnoe eis THY avwrdTw 7E 
dopiy Kal atré pot doxée aif€pa tots maAaois <ipicBat.) ts 
motion is circular; so is that of the stars, which are com- 
posed of it (289 a 15). It is not found in the sublunary 
regions, but pnewma is its “ counterpart ’’ (see Introd. §§ 70 ff., 
App. A §$§ 7 ff., and B). f But see 761 b 15 ff., and note. 
9 See App. A §§ 7 ff., B §§ 7-17. 

171 

i th LAMARISTOPEE)) TAdrAaD 
737 a 
O7repparos,. aAXa. Kay" Tt Tepirrapa TBXN Poe v- 
5 ews ‘ov _ erepov, Shes exet Kat Tobto! 
dpxny.. Ort pev oby 7 ev trois bdo Bepdens eae 
7p ovre dao Trupos Exel THY apxriy, eK tov. TOL- 
ovTwr €o7t davepdv. | eee 
To d¢ ris yoris cOpa, Vo ouvanépyerar [z6 
one ppa 7 TO THs auyixys ap AS. To wey Xwprotov ov 
10 gwparos, daous euTrepiAap, dverat zu Detox y, (rovod- 
Tos 6 cory Oo Kadovpevos voos), 76 8a chpiatov, 
TOUTO TO G@pa° Ths. yov"js Buadvieras, KGL TVEvpLa~ 
Tovrat, pvow .€xov bypay) Ka | ddaTwdy. dvrrep 
od det Lyreiv det Odpale adrd eérévat; odde ; 
ovfev eivat Tijs avoTdons: pLopdijs, dozep ovd€ TOV 
15 6mov Tov Td yaha ovviotayTa” Kal yap: obtos | 
peraBdrrcr Kai edptov ovbey orl rv ovvioTa= 
pLevwov oyKe. , Hie (AIR 
Tlepi peer obv boys, TOS exer TH itt nea rab 

youn Kat TOs ovk € exel, Siaipioras: Suvduer pay pee 

EXEL, evepyeta & ov exer." He 
of de OT EpHLaTos OVTOS mepurrdsjiatos. wat Ke 
voupevov Know Ty abryy Kot? qvTEp TO oOo. 
20 avgdverar bepelopevns Tijs éoxarns Tpodis, ‘ray 
EAI cis Thy dorépar, ovviornat Kal Kuvet 70 Trepir~ 
Twp 70 TOO OnAcos THY aor Konow prep abro- 

TUyXavE tik tvoUpe Mau K aKE tvo. Kal yap,, oft 

1 76 o7épya om. P, secl. A. cW. 259 ave pa Platt, +. me ij ) 
2g P: 76 yulg. 
3 cGpa Aw“W,: ondpya vulg. a haec scsi Blan 

t 

“ME 

® The “ ultimate i Sherlahaitasate * Of." 726 b 1 fyand: PA. 
650 a 34, 651 a 15, 678 a 8 ff. This is Memory jae in a6 
final form; viz., blood. 

172 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. nt. 

and not only the heat) of animals which. operates 
through the semen, but also any other natural residue ~ 
which there may be has within it a principle of life. _ 
_ Considerations of this ‘sort show us that the heat 
which is in-animals is not fire and does not sete its 
ee or principle from fire. 

ider mow the physical part of the. semen. 

| (This it is which, when ‘it is emitted by the male, is 
. 
t 

4 ohana by the portion of soul-principle and acts 
as its vehicle. Partly this soul-principle is separable 
_ from physical matter—this applies to those animals 
where some. divine element. is included, and what 
we call Reason is of. this character—partly it is in- 
separable.) This physical part of the semen, being 
fluid and watery, dissdlves and evaporates ; and on 
: that aecount we should: not always be trying to 
_ detect it leaving the female externally, or to find it 
as an ingredient ‘of the fetation when that has set 
and taken shape, any more than we should expect 
_ to trace the fig-juice which sets and curdles milk. 
_ The fig-juice undergoes'a change ; it does not remain 
_as a part of the bulk which is set and eurdled ; and 
_ the same applies to the semen. 
e have now determined in what sense -fetations 
_ and semen have Soul and in what sense they have not. 
_ They have Soul potentially, but not in actuality. 
;: As semen is 1a residue, and as it is endowed with 
the same moyement as that in virtue of which the 
body grows through the distribution of the ultimate 
_ nourishment, e when the semen has entered the 
uterus it “ sets’ the residue produced by the female 
and imparts to it the same movement with which it 
‘is itself endowed. The female’s contribution, of 
course, is a residue’ too, just as the male’s is, and 

173 

A —— a a a 

737 a 

737 b 

: ARISTOTLE |) 60 

meptrreoua, Kal mdvra To pepe’ Eee Suvdpet, 
evepyela 8° od0év. Kat yap Ta Towadr exer popia 

25. Suvdpet, a duadéper TO Cy Too Gppevos. aomep 

yap Kal eK meTNpwyevwy OTE bev yiveTas TETNPw- 
peva, ote 8 ov, o8Tw Kal ex On Aeos ore pev OAV 
été 5° ov, aX appev. 7d yap Onhy domep Gppey 

€orl TET IPENEVOY, Kal TQ RAT OpTueD o7epHa,, i 

KaBapoy dé. €v yap ovK exer Hovors Thy rhs. 

30 apyyv. Kal dia Todro Gcots Sarqve pial: yivera TOV 

ne dpporepwv exet Ta. Hépy 70 ovviardevor 
aAXG. Thy apxiy ovK EXE S10 od ywerat 
Suboxsr Tabr ay yap TO Too dppevos _emupéper 
ome pyia. otav dé perdoxn Touarns apxfs TO 
TEepitTwELA TO TOD By Acos, KUnMa yiweTat. 
Tots 8 dypots pev owparaddeor dé Peallvé 
pevors meptictarar, Kabdrep ev tots éfijpac. yu- 
Xomevors TO. TepiEnpov. mdvTa be Ta owpaTa 
ouvéxer TO yAtoxpov: Orrep Kal mpoiodar Kai peiLoot 
yuyvou.evots %) TOU vevtpov Ap Saver” puors, gee 
ovvexe. Ta propia Tov laowy, ev pev Tois odoa 
vedpov, €v. d€ Tots TO dydoyov. ras. oy adriis 

5 Hopdiis: € eort Kat dépua Kal dre Kal Spay Kal av 

1 vy. 34-b 7 secluserunt A, <W,. 

: 

* Other attempts to bring out the meaning of this — 
word would include “im perfectly developed, *  under- 

developed,” “* malformed, - * mutilated,” “* congenitally 

disabled.” ' ; 
> i.é., as appears later, sentient Soul (ch. 5), 
° i.@., as above (Il. 23-25), potentially. 

174 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IT. m1. 

contains. all the parts of the body potentially, though 
none in actuality; and “all” includes those parts 
which distinguish the two.sexes.. Just as it some- 
times. happens that deformed ¢ offspring are produced 
by d deformed ‘parents, and sometimes not; so the off- | 
spring produced by a female are sometimes female, 
sometimes. not, but male. The reason is that the 
_ female is as it’ were a deformed male; and the 
menstrual discharge is semen, though in an impure 
condition ; 7.e., it lacks one constituent, and one only, 
the principle of Soul.” ‘This explains why, in the 
case of the: wind-eggs produced by some animals, the 
egg which takes shape contains the parts of both 
sexes;® but it has not this principle, and therefore it 
does not become a living thing with Soul in it; this 
principle has to be supplied by the semen of the 
male, and it is when the female’s. residue secures this 
principle that a fetation is formed.4 
[When substances which are fluid but also cor- 
poreal are heated, an outer layer forms round them, 
just as we find a solid layer forming round things that 
have been boiled, as they cool. ‘All bodies depend on 
something glutinous to hold them together ; and as 
their development proceeds and they become larger, 
this glutinous character is acquired by the substance 
known as. sinew, which holds the parts of animals 
together (in. some it is actual sinew ‘which does 
this, in others its counterpart).’ Skin, blood-vessels, 
membrane and all that class of substances are of the 

_  # Or, “it becomes a fetation,” i.¢., a perfect fetation ; see 
| Tia 10. 

_ °* The following paragraph, which consists partly of re- 
. marks taken from elsewhere, i is irrelevant here. 

* Sometimes, as here, “‘ counterpart” could be repre- 
_ sented by the modern term:‘‘ analogue ” ;~ ef. P.A. 653 b 36. 

175 

737 b 

ARISTOTLE) / 1) 4) 

TO. TOLODTOV yevos” Sade per yap Tatra TO 
Kat Hrrov Kal ohers" drrepox Kal Meier] 
Iv. Tér be Cow Ta pev areAcotépav ExovTa ry 
dvow, orav yévntrar’ KUnua. TéAevov CGov de pare, 
10 TéXevov, Ovpale mpotera: bv’ ds. 3 airias etpnrat 
TpOTepov. téAevov 8° 7709 TOT” corlv, orav TO eV 
dppev ii. TO Se OyjAv TOV KuTpdrov, ev daous éotly 
atrn a Svadopa TOV ywropevany’ eva yap ovre OAv 
yerve OUT appev, doa. und? adra yiverar ek OrjAeos 
Kat dippevos, pnd eK Coewy puyvupevon Kal Trept 
15 pev THS TOUTWY yeveoews UoTEpov epovpev* 

Ta dé CworoKodvra. ev abrois Ta. TéXeva TOV 
Cow, [expe mep av ob yevvnon Sdov Kal Ovpate 
exmepaby, exet avpdues ev avbtois® To yuyvopevov 
C@ov. 

“Ooa dé Ovpale pev Cworoxe?, ev atrois 5° wo- 
ToKet TO ™parTov, oTav yevv7jon TO ov TéAeLov, 

20 roUTwv eviwy pev dmohverau TO WOv worep TOV 
Opale @oroKowvTwy, Kal TO Leov €k TOU @od 
yiverat ev T@ Onde, eviwy 8 drav KaravadwOH 7 
ek TOD Wov Tpody, TeAcLodTaL amo THs DoTEpas, Kal 
Sud TOTO ovK dmohverac TO Mov dao Tijs vaTépas. 
TavTnv So Exoust THY Svadopay ot cedaxywders ¢ ix: 

25 Ques, Tepe. cv daTEpov Kal? ara Aexréov. 

Niv 8 azo tOv mpwrwv apxréov mp@tov. €ort 

1 GAws PS: cAws ev vulg. 
2 adrois Rackham: atré vulg. 

« Of. P.A, 644 a 17, and note there; also Introd. § 70. 

> For ithe meaning of “ perfect”’ animals, see below, 
737 b 15, 16, and the fuller definition given at 732 b 28 ff. 

© i.e, a “perfect” egg; for another sense, see 776 b 1. 

4 For Selachia, see Bk. III, ch. 3. 

176 

EN 

a ah al 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. m1.-1. 

_ Stamp 5 they differ only by the “smore and 
ess, or putting it generally, by excess and de- 
iseees]| rham 

So far as those aukpals ‘whaise naiate sa cmoke im- IV 
oe are concerned,” as soon as a perfect fetation ° 
has been formed, though it is not so far a perfect 
animal, they expel it. The reasons for this I have 
already | stated. A fetation is perfect by the time it 
‘is either male or female. (This applies to those 
animals whose offspring have this distinction of sex, 
for there are’ some ‘which generate offspring ‘that 
aré neither male nor female; these are the animals 
which are not themselves produced by male and 
female parents—not produced in fact as the result 
_of the copulation of a pair ofanimals.. We will speak 
later of the way in which these are generated.) 

The perfect animals, the ones which are internally 
viviparous, retain within themselves the animal which 

is forming, and it remains joined to them until it is. 
A to birth and expelled. 

With regard to those which are internally ovi- 
-parous in ‘the first stage although they are externally 
viviparous, the egg, when it has been perfectly 
formed, in some cases (a) is released, just as it is in 
the externally oviparous animals, and the animal is 
_ produced out of the egg inside the female : ; in other 
cases (6); when the nourishment in the egg has been 
‘used up, the supply for the creature’s perfecting is 
derived from the uterus; and that is why the egg 
_is not released from the uterus... This distinguishing 
“feature belongs to the Selachian fishes, which will 
have to receive special mention. later.? 

_ For the present, however, we must begin first of Generation 
_all with the animals that come first. These are the ™ Y'?*"* 

177 

| ARISDOTLEYVOITARAKAO 4 
737 b 
de ra TéAEva loa mpOra, To.adra dé To Cporo- ) 
Koovray Kat TovTa avOpwrros mp@rov. 
‘H pev obv dardKpuats yiverat aot Tob oméppa~ 
TOS aomep dAAov Twos mepurTaparos. déperar | 
yap €xaoTov eis TOV olKelov Té7TOV odBev droBua- 
30 Cowevov tod mvEvLaTOS, 088" aAAns aizrias Towaurns | 
avayKalovons, Wamep Twes gacw, eAkew * ra aidota 
fpdckovres Borep Tas ouvas, TO Te TVEdpare Bra- 
Copeveny, WoTEp evOeXOLEvOY dMobi Tov mopev- 
Ofivaw ma) Bracapevev ny Tavrynv TH TmepitTwow 
n° TI Ths vypas 7 Enpas Tpopijs, 6 OTL TAS: €fd8ous : 
35 adTav, 7Opoiopevw TH TvedpaTu cvvekKpivovow. 
totro S€é Kowov Kata TavtTwv doa det Kwa, dud 
738 a yap Tod To mvedpa Karacxedy 7 loxds éyyiverat: 
emrel Kal dvev TAUvTNS THS Bias € exKpiverat Ta mepit" 
Topare Kal kabevdovor, a av dverot TE Kat mrjpers 
TMEpUTT patos ot TOTFOL TUXwow ovres. - Spovov 8e 
Kav él ‘tis pain tois dutots bo Tod mvevpaTos 
5 éxdorore Ta oméppara dmroxpiveaba mpos TOUS 
TomoUS mpos ods ciwe pepe TOV KapTor, Gada 
Tovrou rev aitiov, wor7rep elpyrat, TO maow elvar 
Hopea. SeKTLKa TOLS TEPLTTOpLAGL Tos T axpijorors 
(Kad, Tots xXpneyLors)” [otov 7H te Enpa Kal TH 
by pa, Kat TO ) aipare Tas Kkadovpevas, prcBas]. nia 
10 ‘Tots pev odv. O7jAcou mept Tov TOY BoTepav TOTO, 
ee avabev. tTHv. bdo phere: THS TE pe 
14 P: om. vulg. * 4 P: om. yulg, 
= supplevi, cetera seclusi; vid. p. 562, infra. d 

« Cf. Hippocrates, a. apy. inrpixis 22 (i. 626-628 Littré), : 
where the action of the bladder, the head and the uterus in ; 
drawing fluid to themselves is compared to the action of 
oukvat. 

178 

oo 

“4 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. tv. 

rer animals, which means the vinipers ones ; 
nd the first of thesé.is, Man, 

In all of them the semen is secreted in precisely the (a) The 

same way as any other residue. Each of the residues 
is carried to,its proper place. without the exertion of 
any force from the: pneuma and without compulsion 
by any other cause ‘of that sort, although some people 
assert this, alleging that the sexual parts draw the 
residue like cupping-glasses * and that we exert force 
by means of the pneuma, as though it were possible 
for the séminal residue or for the residue of the liquid 
or of the solid nourishment to take any other course 
unless such force were exerted. The reason given 
for this view'is that our discharge of these residues 
is accompanied by the collecting of the pneuma (the 
holding: of the hecathi. But this is a- phenomenon 
which is common to.all. cases where something has to 
be moved, because holding the breath is the way in 
which the required strength is obtained. Besides, 
even without the exertion of this force residues are 
actually discharged during sleep, if the places con- 
cerned are relaxed and full of residue. Such state- 
ments are on a par with saying that the seeds of 
plants aré on each occasion secreted to the places 
where they commonly bear their fruit by’ means of 
pneuma. No, the real reason for this; as has been 
said, is that‘in all animals there are ‘parts for the 
reception of the residues, both for the useless (and 
for the useful ones)-[e.g., both.for the solid:and the 
fluid ; and for the blood there are the blood-vessels 
as they are called].? 

The region of the uterus in females.—Higher up 

_ in the body the two blood-vessels, the Great Blood- 

» This phrase is‘an interpolation. See p. 562. 
179 

738 a 

JARISTOTLE)) 0) 

yaAns Kat Tijs doprijs, moat Kal Aertat prdBes 
tehevT@ow els TAS borépas, ov Se ee 
ek Ths tTpodhs, Kal Tis pices de a. tl 

TeTTEew ob Suvapievys, exkpiverat Oud error 
15 dAcBav eis Tas dorépas, od Suvapevww dud es 
orevoxewplav dexecbar THY ‘UrrepBohny Tob miBous, 
Kat yivera TO 700s olov atwoppois. - dxpiBas per 
ody 1) meptodos ob TéraKTau Tals yuvauge, Bovrerau 
de POwovrev yivecbar TOV _beqvev edAdyers” pu- 
Xporepa yap Ta owpaTa Tayv fdow 6 oray Kal TO 
20 mepiexov oupBaivy ytyveabar _ToLobrov, ai de tTav 
pynv@v advvodor puxpat bua THY THs. ochivys amo- 
Acupw, Sudmrep Kat Xetpepious oupBatver Tas ovy- 
ddovs ‘elvas TeV pnvay peadAov 7) nH Tas peodrnTas. 
jreraBeBAnKdros ev oby eis ata Too TEpuTTaLaros 
BodArerat yiyveobar Ta Karapyvee kard THY etpn- 
25 pevnv Treplodoy, [ik [7 TTETTE[LPLEVOU dé KaTa puuk pov Get 
Tt dmrokpiverar~ 810 7a AevKa puKpois et Kal’ maL- 
dtors ovat yiverar Tots OyjAcow. petpidlovea peev 
oov dpporepac adTat at amoxpices TOV TrepirTw- 
pdteov Ta odpara oa Covow, dre yeyvopevns Kab- 
dpoews TOV TEpiTT@pATOY , a Tod vooeiv area 
30 Tots Cwpacw* 17 yeropeviny be 7 q TrAcrdveoy yeyvo- 
pevwv Brdrret: move? yap 7) vocous } TOV owpmatwv 
Kabaipeow, 510. Kal Ta AeuKa cuvexDs ywwopeva Kal 
mAcovalovra tiv avénow adatpetrar TOV madiwv. 
"EE avdyrns pev odv 7) mepitrwors adrn yiverat ~ 

; 1 wixpois rc] puxpa onueta Z. 

9 i.e, the vena cava and, the whole venous systeras and the 
aorta and the whole arterial system. 

* The moon has ho real connexion with menstruation. 
Various notions on this subject will be found in’ H. M. Fox, 

180 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

vessel and the Aorta,* branch out into»many -fine 
blood-vessels, which terminate in the uterus. _When 
these are overfull of nourishment (which owing to its 
own coldness the female system is unable to concoct), 
it passes through these extremely fine_blood-vessels 
into the uterus ; but owing to their being so narrow 
they cannot hold the excessive quantity of it, and so 
a sort of haemorrhage takes place. In women the 
period is not accurately fixed, but it tends to happen 
when the moon is waning,” which is what we should 
expect, since the bodies of animals are colder when 
their environment is colder, and the time of new 
moon is a cold time on account of the disappear- 
ance ° of the moon: the same thing explains why 
the end >of the month is stormier than the middle-4 

When the residue has changed into blood, the men- 
strual discharge tends to occur in accordance. with 
the period just mentioned’; but. when the residue 
has not been concocted, small quantities are secreted 
from time to time, and’ this is why “ whites ’’ occur 
in females, even while they are still quite small 
children. These two secretions of residue; if moder- 
ate in amount, keep the body in a sound condition, 
because they constitute an evacuation of the residues 
which cause disease. If they fail to occur, or occur 
too plenteously, they are injurious, producing either 

' diseasés or a lowering of the body ; and ‘that is why 
‘continuous and abundant discharge of “ whites ” 
_ prevents young girls from. growing. 

Thus the production of this residue by females is, 

Selene. For other references see F,.H. A. Marshall, “‘ Sexual 
Periodicity,” in Phil. Trans. Royal, Soc. (B), ~CCXXVI 
(No. 539), p. 442, n. © i.é, complete waning. 
4 See 777 b 35, n. 
. 181 

738 a 

738 b 

“1 ARISTOTLE)! t/t 
Tots Onder dua Tas etpnpcévas. airtas’ pa Suvapievys 

35 Te yap merrew THS piocws avdyKn TEepitrTapa iy 

yreobat [4] povov THs axpiorov tpodhs, aAAa Kat 
ev tats pAeiv, brrepBaAAew TE An Gvovra” Kara. 
Tas Aemroraras prAeBas. eveka dé 708 BeXriovos 
Kal To TéAOUS 7) vats KATAX PHT AL mpos TOV TOTOV 
Tobrov Tijs yeveoews xapw, ¢ Gres ofov ejeMe 
Towvrov yevyr ae ETEpov" 709 yap drdpyer Suvdpiet 
ye ov TOLObTOV olov 7p €oTt Taparos dardxprots. 

Tots peev, obv Oijdeow a draco, avaryicatov yiyveot au 
TepiTTwpa, Tots jev atwarucois mhetov,, Kal TOUT@Y 
avOpwmw meiorov: dvdyKn be Kab Tots dois 
abpoileabat TWO. avoraow eis Tov doTepiKov Tém0V. 
To 8 airtov, ote Tots 8 aipariKots: mAcfov. Kat 
ToUrw ott mA€eiotov Tots irc saree + tetpenet 
TpoOTEpov. 

Tod & év pev tots Orfdeou Taow dmdpyew nepir~ 
Twa ToLobToV, ev be Tois dppeot pa méaow, €via 
yap od mpoterae youn, GAN Bore Ta Tmpoteweva* 
TH ev TH yor} KWHOEL Snjoupyet 70 auprordjevov 
ek Tijs ev Tots OnAcow drs, ovUTw ra Tovadra fev}? 
TH <v. adbrois _Kunget ev TO popiy ToUrw, bev 

7 
15 dmoxpiverat 70 OTTEpHa., rabro mouet Kad jouviornow. 

TOUTO, oS €oriv, O TOmos O Trepl TO ond OLLG mao 
Tots €xovow: apy? yap Ths dvcews 7) Kapdia Kal 
» _7AnBvovra Z: an Odvovra vulg. } 

2 mpoi€ueva PS : \poeipnueva vulg. 
® secluserunt A.-W. aT 

* Se., from the useful nourishment, viz., blood. . 
3 At 727 0 21 ff and 728 a 30 ff. : 
¢ This sentence ‘has been remodelled in the iravsln tions 

since in the Greek the construction is not carried through. 
182 

/ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. wv. 

7 

on the one hand, the result of necessity, and the 
reasons have been given :, The female system cannot 
‘effect concoction, and therefore of necessity residue 
must be formed not only from the useless nourish- 
“ment, but also ¢ in the blood-vessels, and when there 
is a full complement of it in those very fine blood- 
vessels, it must overflow. On the other hand, in 
order to serve the better purpose, the End, Nature 
diverts it to this place and employs it there for the 
‘sake of generation, in order that it may become 
another creature of the same kind as it would have 
become, since even as it is, it is potentially the same in 
character as the body whose secretion it is. 

In all female animals, then, some residue must of 
necessity be formed: a greater amount of it in the 
“blooded ones, and the greatest of all in human beings, 
though some substance must of necessity collect in 
the region of the uterus in the other animals too. 

e reason why a larger amount is produced in the 
blooded animals, and the largest amount of all in 
human beings, has already been stated.® 
_ But although a residue of this sort occurs in all 
females, it does not occur in all males. . Why is this ? ¢ 
Some males do not emit semen, but, just.as the ones 
Ewhich emit semen fashion the creatare that is taking 
“shape out of the material supplied by the female by 
‘the agency of the movement resident in the semen, 
‘so these fashion it into shape by the agency of the 
Movement which resides in that part of themselves 
whence the semen is secreted ; they produce. this 
Same effect of causing the material to set. (The 
part to which I refer is the region around the dia- 
e ghragm i in all those animals which have one, because 

@ Cf. above, 736 a 27 and references there given. 
183 

738 b 

20 

25 

30 

ARISTOTLOI SAITAMA 

TO avdAoyor, to be KadTw mpoodinn Kal TovTov 
xdpw. atriov’ 8%) tod Tots pev dppeot py maow 

elvat mrepirronpa, yevvntiKoy, Tots dé Orjreat Taow, 
oT. TO C@ov odie enyuxar ¢ €oTwW, det. de, rrapéxet. 

TO Bev Oirv ry vAny, 70-8’ dppev TO Snyubup vai 
| 

TavTHV yap avTav Papev € eXELV Tye Suvapuuy Ekd~ 
Tepov, Kal 70 elvat TO ev OAAv TO 8 dppev TovTO. 
WOTE TO Mev OfAv day rKatioy TOPEXEW, oOpua Kat 
oyKov, TO 8 dppev ovK dvaryratoy: ovTe yap Ta 
opyava avdyren evurrdpxew ev Tots yeyvopevots ovTe 
TO TroLwobv. EoTt dé TO pev oapin. €K TOO Oareos, 7 il 
de pox €K TOU dppevos: 7 yap pox, ovoia ow- 
patos Twos €oTw. Kal dia TodTo doa TAY ) 
opoyerdv plyverra Gihe Kal dppev (1éyarerrast dé dv 

toou of xpovot kal eyyds al Kviocis, Kal Ta, peyeOn 
TOV oop ey HA) mod SceornKev), TO pev mp@rov 
KaTa vhy oporernra yiyveTaL KoLvOV dudorépeny, 
olov Ta yuyvopeva €€ aAdmEeKos Kal KvVOS Kal 
mépoiKkos Kal aAeKtpudvos, mpotdvTos dé Tod ypovo 

Kat e€ érépwv Erepa yryvdpeva rédos aztoBatver 
Kata 76 OAAv Thv popdiy, womep Ta an€épuata TA 

35 E€evukad KaTa THY Xxwpav.. avTn yap 1 Ty vrAH 

* Or “ reality.” Cf. De anima 415 b 7 ff., where the So 
is said to be the Cause and principle of the ‘body (a) as th 
source of its movement, (6) as its Final Cause, that “* for the 
sake of which” the body exists, (c) as being the essence’ 
living bodies. The last is explained thus: the cause ( 
ground) of the being of anything: is its essence; the bei 
of living things is to live; and the Cause and principle o 
their being and living is Soul. Cf. also Aristotle’s repeated 

184 

—_— 

t 
( 
3 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

she first principle of any natural creature’s system is 
the heart or its counterpart, while the lower parts 

are an appendage added for the sake of that.) Why 
does this generative residue, then, not occur in all 
males, although it occurs in all females ?_ The answer 
is that an animal is a living body, a body with Soul 
init. The female always provides the material, the 
“male Provides that which fashions the material into 
shape ; this, in our view, is the specific characteristic 
bit eal each of the sexes’: that is ‘what it’ means to be 
male or to be female. \ Hence, necessity requires that 
‘the female should provide the physical part, i.e., a 
quantity of ‘material, but not that the male should do 
‘so, since necessity does not require that the tools 
-should.reside in the product that is being made, nor 
that the agent which uses them should do so, Thus 
| the physical part, the body, comes from the female, 
and the Soul from the male, since the Soul is the 
“essence ® of a particular body. On this account, 
“when a male and a female of different species copulate 
(which happens in the case of animals whose periods 
are equal and whose times of gestation run close, 
‘and which do not differ widely in physical size), the 
first generation, so far as resemblance goes, takes 
equally after both parents (examples are the offspring 
of fox and dog,’ and of partridge and common fowl), 
but as time goes on and successive generations are 
produced, the offspring finish up by taking after the 
female as regards their bodily form, just as happens 
'when seeds are introduced into a strange locality— 
the plants take after the soil, the reason being that 

‘statements that no part of the body can be such invanything 
“but name unless it has Soul in it; see also P.A. 641 a'25 fi. 
+. & Viz., the so-called Laconian hound see H.A; 607 a 3. 

185 

ARISTOTLE) | TATA 

mapéxovoa Kal TO c@pa Tots oéppaclv €orw. Kal 
Suds Tobro Tots poev OnAeoe TO poplov TO SekTiKOV od 
mopos corly, aan’ Exovor didoraow ai borépat- 
Tots oe dppeot mépot Tots o7épya mpotepevors, 
avaipot 8° obTot. 

Téy dé Tepurropudrioy EKAOTOV dp.a. év Te rots 
olkelois TOTOLS EoTL at ylyverau TepirTapia. ap6- 
TEpOV oy onder, d dy en Tt Big moh Kat Tapa. PR: 

Av iy bev ovv aitiay dmoxpiveTat Ta TEpU 
para Ta YevynTiKd Tots dos, ctpnTae. i oe nt 

“Orav & €XOn TO oméppa amo Tod dppevos Tav 

OTEepa Tpoieevwy, GvvioTnat TO KaVapwrarov TOD 

TEpLTTwMpaTos—ToO yap mA¢cioTov axpnoTov Kal ev 

tots KaTapnviors €orly bypov (dv), Wamep Kal ct . 
10 ro appevos yovijs TO byporarov Kal Tijs elodmaé 

mpoécews [Kall % mpotépa vis borépas adyovos 
peGAAov Tots metorous” eddrre yap exe Deppornra 
puxucny did rH anepiay, TO de TeTTELLPLEVOV TaXos 
EXEL Kal CeowpaTurat paArov. 

“Ooats de BH yiverat Bvpalé tis mpdeais, i ‘TOV 
yuvarccoy n Tov aAAwy Cov, dud TO a) evuTdpxew 

15 dypnotov TepiT Tapa. mond €v TH dmoKpicaet 

TowavTN, ToGodTdy E€oTL TO ey YevOpHEvov dgov. 70 
drroeuTopevov Tots Adpale Tpotewevous kpousy | 6 
ouviarnnjow 7) TOO dppevos SvUvapus 7 EV. TH ore pps 

vers 

1 <6y> supplevi. 2 seclusi. 

@ See Bk. I. 718 a 10 ff. 
> Cf. Hippocrates, a. gapkav 13 (viii. 600 Littré) 9 

Tpodn émevdav adixnrat és Exactov, TovavTnv amédwKe THV A Ya | 

ExdoTou: SKola TEP Hv: 
° The “ concoction’ of the semen in viviparous. land- 
animals takes place actually.during copulation (see 717 b 24 

186 

- a —S— —— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. rw. 

the soil provides the material—i.e., the physical body 
_—for the seeds, ‘And on. this account the. part. in 
_ females which receives the semen is not a passage, 
_ but i it—te., the uterus—is fairly wide, whereas the 

pak that emit semen have passages only, and these 

ve no blood in them.* , 

as ce only when it occupies its own proper place 

each of the residues becomes that particular 

wage ; before that time none of them can do so 
_ without great violence exerted contrary to nature. 
_ >» We have now given the reason for the secretion of 
_ the generative residues in animals. 
_ «Im those species which emit semen, when’ the 
_ semen from the male has entered, it causes the purest 
pe _of the residue to “set "—I say “ purest por- 
tion,” because the most part of the menstrual dis- 
_ charge is useless, being fluid, just as the most. fluid 
portion of the male semen is, and in most cases the 
earlier. discharge during any one emission is less 
fertile than the later, because it has less soul-heat 
owing to its being unconcocted, whereas that which 
“has ‘been concocted ‘is ‘thicker and has more 
body in it.° 

In those cases (whether women or other female 
animals) where there is no external discharge (due'to 
there being no large amount of useless residue in the 
generative secretion), the amount of stuff which is 
produced within them corresponds in quantity to 
_ that which remains behind in those animals which 
discharge externally. This stuff gets “set ” by the 
dynamis of the male (a) present in the semen which 

and. 718 a 5 above), which explains the phenomenon here 
_ mentioned. In fishes and serpents the semen is already con- 
_ cocted before the time of copulation (ibid.). 

187 

739 a 

739 b 

ARISTOTLE TAI 480 

TO dmroxpwopevey, a, els) FO" dppev’ €. Adovros rod 
dvddoyov popiov ‘rats ‘torépais, aomep & éy riot rv 
20 evr opeov paiverar oupBatvov. sy Bee 
“Ort 8 yevopeevn byporns pera Tis forts sath 
dijAcow oveev ovpBdrdrcrat eis TO Une, eipyTau 
TpOTEpov. pddiora & dv Sdéctev, & ore, Kabdzrep tots 
appest, ylyverau Kal Tats yous wuKT@p é Vaud 
ow eLoverpwsrrety. ddA, TobTo onciov ovbev: yi- 
25 vera yap Kal Tots véous TOV | Gppeveov Tots péAdovar 
pev pnbev. dé TRIS EROS 7 Tots ru" eines 2 
dyovov. » atl 
“Avev pev ody THs Tob Spc mpotoews ev. Th 
ovvovoia advvarov souraBetv, Kal dvev Ths TOV 
yovaucetov TepiTTacews }) Odpale mpoeAPovons 
H evros ikavits ovons. od cvpBawovens évTot THS 
30 etwOvias yiyveobat Tots O)Aeow ovis trept mp 
opuidiay TV rovavray ovAAapBadvovow, dy TU 6 
totros <y’) opyav* wat karaBeByxviae at bor épat 
ev7ds." adn’ ws em TO FOND ovpBatver, jexelvns 
dud To Ta) CULE LYK EVAL TO OTOLG ywouerns THS 
ExKplocws, ped Hs etwbe yeyveabar Kal Tots appeow 
35 9) 7807) Kal Tats yuvaugiv: ovtw.5° Exovros evodeiras 
ov Kai, TH TOO dppevos OTEPMATL. | 6 | nin 
‘H 8 ddeos ovr; TOS ylyverats Kabdrep otovrat 
Teves (orevov yarp ir0 oTopa TOV varepav) ; aan’ els 
TO Tpoover, ov7ep to OAV mpoterat Hy av evicus 
avray ixpdada ‘yuvopevnv; evrabda Kal TO vdippev 
mpoterar [éav tis e€uxpdon|.* - ore pev ob ‘pevet 

ay 4 } 
4 ert mpotepevors corr. P: emmpoieevors vulg. 
2 rdn0s' vy opyav A. -W. : Témros 6 ‘yewpyav P: y om. Lyonae 
3 2pros' P's eyyis vulg. 
4 secl, A.-W., Platt. 

188 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vw. 

, De ncorctet, or (6) when the part of the female ana- 
4 logous to the uterus is inserted into the male (as 
>is. observed to take place in certain insects).@ 
| Lhaye e said already ” that the fluid which is pro- 
_ duced in females and accompanies sexual excitement 
_ contributes nothing at all to the fetation. The 
| strongest reason for believing that it does is that the 
| phenomenon of night effusions occurs in women just 
} as in mén; but this is no proof at all, because it 
| oceurs with young men who come almost to the point 
_ but in fact emit nothing, and also tania those who as 
| yet emit infertile semen. 
_. Conception cannot occur without (a) : an emission 
| from the male during copulation and. without (6) the 
| resence of the menstrual. residue either externally 

harged or available in sufficient quantity inter- 

nally.. Conception takes place, however, even if the 
pleasure which women usually experience during 
‘sexual intercourse fails to occur, if the part concerned 
| happens to be in heat and the uterus has descended 
within. Generally, however, pleasure does occur, 
_ because when the secretion, which is usually accom- 
panied by pleasure in man and woman alike, takes 
| place; the os wtert has not closed, and‘in these con- 
_ ditions a ‘better passage is: meee: ott the semen of 
areer 

The. discharge does: nat (as some suppose) nae 

Belanc within the uterus, because the os uteri is narrow. 
_ The discharge of the male takes place in front of it, 
at precisely the same spot where the female dis- 
charges _ the moisture which is produced in some 
instances. Sometimes it remains in this_ place, 

Cf, 738 b 12. > Bk. I, ch. 20 
© Cf 127 b 33 ff. 

189 

ARISTOTLE) 9/0) 
re Toorop éxov" TOV TOrov,* ore bé, ay dyn “oup- 
beéTpwos exovoa Kal Beppu dua Ty xdBapow qe 
5 orépa, elow od. onpetov dé* Kal yap TO mpdabera® 
dypa mpoorebévra _adatpetrar Enpa. ert ‘Se oa 
TOV Sow Tpos 7@ drolapart Exel TOS jorépas, 
Kabdzep Opvis kal TOV ixPdeov ot woroobvres, 
advvatov €Kel 147) omdobar TO OT Eppa, GA’ adebev 
eAbeiv. eAicer de THY ‘younv 6 Toros Sud. tap Gep- 
10 pornra THY tmdpxovoay. Kal 7 TOV KaTapNviwv 
be exKepiols Kal ovvdbpovors eptrupever Oeppornra 
ev 7@ popiyy Toure, [wore|* Kabarep Ta KwriKa® 
Tay dyyeiwv, ray Bepud dvaxhvobh, ond 70 dap 
eis ada KaTaarpepopevov TOU oréparos. | Kat 
ToOTov ev TOV Tpomov ylyverat ondots, ws 8 Twe 
15 Aéyouot, Tots opyavuxots ™pos Thy avvovotay po~ 
plows od yiverau Kat’ ov0éva TpomTov. dvdrahuy be 
oupBaiver kat Tots A€youar mpotecbar Kal THY 
vatka o7épya. Tpoiepevars yap | ea oupBaiver 
Tais dorépats mdAw clow omar, cirep. puxOjoera 
TH Yoh TH Too appevos. To d ovTe ytyveoOar 
20 TEptepyov, 7 Oe puous ovdev mrovet meplepyov. Fete tir 
Tav 6€ ovorh 4 ev rats dorépais, dndxpuots 
tod OnXeos bo Tijs 708 dppevos YOvAS, Tapa 
m)xjovov movovons aorep emi Too _ydranros: THs 
qmuetias: Kal yap: UT] mueria yaha €orl Deppornra 
Cwrikny €xov, 7) To Spiovov eis €v dyer Kal owviornar, 

1 éyov Y : €xovra vulg, 2 zémov Platt : : zpémov. vulg. 
3 mpocbera P: apdobev vulg. 4 Sore seclusi. 
5 kava Platt: dxéura vulg.: vas quod non est plenum 
x (=keva ?). 

@ Of. 128 a 31 ff. 
190 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IT. rv. 

metimes, if the uterus happens to be in a suitable 
Fabadition and hot owing to the evacuation of the 
-menses, the uterus draws it in. Evidence ag pages is 
e fact that pessaries though wet when applied are 
i bs ede removed. se as animals (such as 
birds and viviparous fishes) whose uterus is close ‘by 
the diaphragm there is no alternative: the semen 
must be drawn in ; it cannot enter at the moment of 
discharge. This region, in virtue of the heat present 
in it (the discharge and aggregation of the menstrual 
fluid also produce fiery heat in this part) draws up the 
_semen-in the same way that conical vessels which 
have been washed out with something warm. draw 
water up into themselves when they are turned 
mouth downwards. And that is the way in which 
the semen is drawn in; it is certainly not done, as 
some allege, by the parts that are instrumental in 
tion. We find the situation reversed in the 
theory that the woman as well as the» man emits 
semen, since if the uterus emits any semen outside 
itself, it will have to draw it back inside again if it 
is to mingle with the semen of the male. Such a 
performance is superfluous, and Nature does nothing 
which i is superfluous. 
- The action of the semen of the male in “ setting ” 
_ the female’s secretion in the uterus is similar to that 
| of rennet upon milk.’ Rennet is milk which contains 
_ vital heat, as semen does, and this integrates the 
homogencous substance and makes it “set.” As the 

_ * Cf. 755.a 18. This is a remarkable intuition of the 

"essential rdle played by ferment action in embryonic develop- 

| ment. Cf. also Job x. 10 “ Hast thou not poured me out as 

milk, and curdled me like cheese ? Thou hast clothed me 

_ with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones and 
_ Sinews ” (R.V.). 

191 

739 b 

140 a 

25 

30 

or 

ARISTOTLE) FT? 174 

Kal. 2) ‘you mpos ry TOV Karapnviaw dvow Tabro" 
mérovlev" 7) yap adr pvois €eort yddaxros Kat 
Karapaviwy. ovvidvros wi 700 cwparwdous eK- 
KpiveTat TO Dypov, | Kal Tmepiioravran Kd«Aw Enpawwo- 
peveoy TOV YENpay | bpeves, Kal e& dvdyens Kat 
evekd Twos" Kat yap Oeppawopeven EnpaivecBau 
dvaryicatoy 7a, eoxara Kal uxyouevwr, Kat det p42), 
ev vyp@ To Cov elvat adda Keywpiopevov.. Ka- 
Aobvrau S€ TovTwv of pev dpeves Ta dé ydpia, 
Suapépovra TO padrov Kat iyrrov: 6 opotws 8 hip 
xovow év Te Tots WoTdKols TabTa Kal Tots C@o- 
TOKots. * 
"“Orav dé ovoTi TO Kono 789, rene 
movel Tots O7ELpo}LEvoLs.. 7 Hey yep apx7, al ev 
Tots a7réppacw ev avtois eat 7 mporn: dra. ° 
attn amoxpilf évodca duvajer mpoTEepov, amo Tav- 
TIS. apierat 6 te BAaords Kai 7 pita. avTn 8 
eotlv h TIHV Tpodiyy AapBaver: Setran yap’ adéjoews 
70 purer. ovUTw Kal ev TH KUHpATL tpéTrov Twa 
mavTwv evovreoy TOV feopiwy Suvdpet. a) dpx7 7pe 
6000 pddvora € evuTrdpXet. 510 dmroxpiverat m™p@Tov 
% Kapdia evepyeia. Kal TodTo ob povov emi Tijs 
aicbijcews djAov (ovpBaiver yap ovTws), GAA Kab 
emt TOU Aoyou. orav yap am daudoitv daroxpu0 fj, 
det adro atito duoiKety TO yevouevov, Kaldaep am- 
ravTo P: roéro vulg. 2 67 A.-W., Ob* : dé vulg. 

rs 

1 

@ dvats, as Often, refers specially to the substance of the. 

thing. The substance of milk and the menstrual fluid is 
identical, because they are both residues of the useful 
nourishment, 

192 

* GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. wv. 

nature * of milk and the menstrual fluid is one and 
the same, the action of the semen upon the substance 
of the menstrual fluid is the same as that of rennet 
upon milk. Thus when the “setting” is effected, 
2.e., when the bulky portion * sets,” the fluid portion 
comes off; and as the earthy portion solidifies mem- 
branes form all round its outer surface. _ (This is the 
result of necessity ; but also it is to.serve rpose : 
@) Necessity ordains that the extreme shittace of a 

‘should solidify when heated as well as when 
abate? j (6) it is requisite that the young animal 
should not be situated in fluid but well away from it.) 
Some of these are called membranes ; some choria®: 
and they differ by the “ more and less.” ¢ They are 
found in Ovipara and Vivipara alike. 

' Once the fetation has “ set,”’ it behaves like seeds ® — 
sown in the ground. . The first principle of growth) Senter 
is present in the seeds themselves too, and as soon te embryo. 
as this, which at first was present potentially, has 
become distinct, a shoot-and a root are thrown 
out from it, the root being the channel by which 
nourishment is obtained, for of course the plant 
, needs material for growth. So too in the fetation, 
in a way all the parts are present potentially, but 
the first principle has made the most headway, 
and on. that account the first to become distinct 
in actuality is the heart. This is plain. not, only ‘to Heart. 
the senses (for after all it isa matter of fact), but 
also to the reason. Once the fetation which has 
been formed is separate and distinct from both the 
parents, it must manage for itself, just like a son who 
has’ set up a house of his own independently of his 

> See also H.A. Bk. VI, che 3. 
© See 737 b 7, n..-and Introd. § 70. 

H 193 

ARISTOTLED!T ATH 

740 a 
ovxiabev TEKVOV amr marpos. wore det apxny €, éyew, 
ag’ Hs Kal verepov Svakdopnots Tod odparos 
ylverat Tots Caous. et yap e€wlev mor’ éorae kat 
dorepov evecopevn, od [ovov Svamroprjcecev av Tus 
TO 70TE, ay ore dvdyKn, OTay EkacrTov xopilyrat 
tay popiy, Tavrny dmdpxew mp@rov, e€ js Kat 
7) avénots dmrdpyet Kal 7) Kiros tots dAXous. [40- 
plots. OvdTrep doo. A€yovow, wore Anékptros, 
TO elu T™parrov duaxpivecbar TaV SOO, dorepov 
15 be TA EVTOS,. OUK ophas A€yovow, aorrep gvdtvey 
7) AcBivesv Cepuv. TH pev yap Touadr” (ovK €xEL 
apyny ohus, Ta d¢ la mdvr exer Kal evros. EXEL. 
S10 mp@tov 1} _Kapdia paivera Suapuopern maou 
Tots evaipows* apx7) ‘yap. avTH Kal TOV Opovojep@v 
Kal Tov dvopovopepav. 770 yap apxyy Tadrny 
20 a€tov axodcat Tob C@ov Kal Tod ovoThwatos, 6Tav 
dénrar Tpodijs* TO yap 57) ov’ av&dverar. Tpopn) 
de Ceov 7 a7 eoxarn ala Kat To dvdhoyov. TOUTWY 

8° ayyetov at préBes: 51d 7 Kapdia Kat | Tobraw 
1 dv} Gov Y. srela' 

1 

o 

* See Diels, Vorsokr.® 68 A 145, 

» See Introd. § 19. 

¢ The point is that by this time the fetation is definitel 
constituted—it is an individual—it exists, ‘and that any 
exists can correctly be said to have an dapyy. Also, that 
which exists needs nourishment, and in animals nourishment 
means blood, of which the heart is the apy7. (As Aristotle 
says elsewhere, 735 a, the heart supplies the pine of 
growth, and the nutritive faculty of Soul operates through 
the heart.) This, then, is why, as soon as the fetation is 
definitely constituted, the heart is formed—otherwise no 
growth could take place. 

4 Tt is unnecessary to read {Gov for dv: dv gives better 
point to the argument, with which compare the passage 

194 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. rv. 

father. That is why it must have a first principle, 
' from which also the subsequent ordering of the 
_ animal’s body is derived. Otherwise, supposing this 
_ principle is to come in at some moment from outside 
| and take up its position inside later on, then we may 
| well be puzzled at what moment this is to happen, 
_ and also we may point out that of necessity the first 
principle must be present at the outset, at the time 
when each of the parts is being separated from the 
| rest, since the growth and movement of the other 
parts are derived from it. That is why those people 
| are wrong who, like Democritus,* hold that the 
external ‘parts of animals become distinct first, and 
_ then the internal ones. They might be speaking of 
animals carved out of wood or stone, the sort of things 
which have no first principle at all, whereas living 
animals \all have. such a principle, and it is. inside 
them. .On this.aceount in all blooded animals. it is 
the heart which. can first be seen as something. dis- 
tinct, as this is the first principle-both of the “ uni- 
_ form ” and of the “ non-uniform ”’ parts ’—since this 
is justifiably designated as first principle of the animal 
or organism from the moment when it begins to need 

_ nourishment,’ for of course that which exists grows,? 

and, for an animal, the ultimate form of nourish- 
' ment is blood or its counterpart. Of these fluids 
_ the blood-vessels are the receptacle,’ and therefore 

735 a 13-26 (where again the reading with év should be kept 
_ in 735 a 22). Here the point is clearly made that, once a 
_ thing has come into being (yévyrar), it must of necessity grow. 

_ See also note on 744 b 36. 

¢ The blood-vessels distribute the ‘* ultimate nourishment ” 
_ to the parts of the body, which, as Aristotle says (743 a 1), are 
_ moulded round them like a wax figure round a core or 
foundation, and are formed out of them. “s 

195 

ARISTOTLE) 1 1! 
740 a 

> 

px. SiAov dé ToiTo €x T&v toTropiav Kal TOY 
dvaropaw. vide rine 
*Ezret dé Suvdpet pev 797) EGov aredes b€, adA- 
25 Aobev dvayKatov AapBavevw Ty Tpogy" 510 pee 
TH botépa Kat TH exovon, womep yi durov » TOO 
ite tpodyv, Ews av rehew ij Tos TO Rt 
7 oH) C@ov dvvdper TOPEVTUKOY. Sid ek Tis Kapd as 
Tas dvo préBas mp@rov" 7 pou dméypaspev" dad" 
dé tovtwrv hréBia aarnpTyTAL m7 pos Thy v oTépay 3 
30 xadovpevos opparos. €oTu yap. ry dpudadds prep, 
Tots fev pula, Tots dé mAclovs THY Low. Tepl | 
TavTas Kédugos Sepparucoy fr) Kadovpevos pte 
Aos|? Sua 70 SeicBat cwryplas Kal oKémns THY TOV 
preBav dobéveray. at dé preBes otov pilac Tos 
35 TI tborépav ovvdrrovar, be ov AapBavee TO Kina 
TH Tpopipy ToUTOU yap xydpw ev tais torépais 
prever tO Cov, adr’ odx ws Anpoxperos | oyow, iva 
Suamhérrnran Ta jeopta. Karo 7a pLopia Tis exovons. 
740 b ToOTO yap emt TOV @oroKowyrwy davepov: exeiva 
yap €v Tots ots AapBdver TH Sudkpiow, Kexwopt- 
opeva Tis LaTpas. 
’Amropyaete 5° av TUS, el TO aiya bev Tpody) € eoTw, 
un dé Kapdia TpParn yiverar évaysos odoa, [ro 8 
aipa Tpody} |" n Oe tpopy Ovpaber, dev cio AOev 
5%) mpwrm tpody;, 7) Tobr odk adnfes, ws maca 
1 npwras P.  seclusit Bekker. 

3 secluserunt A.-W.; pro 76 8 alua . . . Ovpaber et sanguis 
est ex extrinseco d. 

*@ HA. Bk. U1, ch. 3. ' 

» Or, ‘sketches in,” ‘‘ traces out.’ Cf. 743 b 20, and 
a different metaphor at 743 a 2. 

© Cf. 145 b 25 ff. 4 See Diels, Vorsokr5.68 A 144. 

196 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. 1. 

the heart is the first principle of them as well. This 
is clearly brought out in the Researches * and in the 
Di. e fi — 7 

_ Now since the fetation is already an animal potenti- 
| ally, though an imperfect one, it mist get its nourish- 
: ae from elsewhere; and that is why it makes use | 
of the uterus, z.e., of the mother, just as a plant makes 

_ use of the earth, in order to get its nourishment, until 
such time as it is sufficiently perfected to be a potenti- 
ally locomotive animal. That is why Nature pre- 
scribes ® first of all the two blood-vessels that run 
_ from the heart ; and attached to these are some small 
| blood-vessels which run to the uterus, forming what’ | 
| is known as the umbilicus; the umbilicus © being of 
' course a blood-vessel—a single blood-vessel in some 
_ animals, and consisting of more numerous ones in 
_ others. Round these blood-vessels there is a skin- 
like integument, because the blood-vessels being 
| weak need a protective covering to keep them safe 
_ and sound. The blood-vessels join on to the uterus 
_ as though they were roots, and through them the 
_ fetation gets its nourishment. And that of course 
_ is the reason why the young animal stays in the 
| uterus (not as Democritus @ alleges, in order that its 
| parts may be moulded after the fashion of the parts 
_ of its mother). This is manifest in the case of the 
' Ovipara, whose parts become distinct in the egg, 2.€., 
_ after they have been separated from the matrix. 

_ __Here is a puzzle which may be raised. If (1) the 
_ blood is nourishment, (2) the heart is the first thing 
_to be formed, and when formed contains blood, and 
_ (8) the nourishment comes from outside, from whence 
did the first nourishment* enter? Well, perhaps 

* i.e, the blood which is in the heart to begin with. 
197 

ARISTOTLE })') 5% 

Oipaber, arr dbOds, womep ev Tots Tov puTav 
o7éppaow eveoti Te Towbrov TO Patvdopevov mpd-= 
tov yaAaxT@des, ovrw Kai ev TH tAn Tov Cowv 
TO TEpiTTWLA THs CvoTdcews Tpody eaTW. 
~ /, : _ A 
‘H perv obv ad&nows TH Kkvujpare yiverar Sia Tod 
> a \ eX , 54 VISES 3) tiated .€y t 
10 oppadod tov adrov Tpdrov oymep 61a TOY pildv 
a a A . : - sy Fat ae) 
tots utois [kat tots Caos avtois; Stay amo- 
r x P * Cs iiaetil To veer 
Avodow, é« Tis ev abrots tpodhs|"* wept civ voTEpov 
AeKréov Kara. Tods oixetous THY Adyar Katpovs. 7 
de Sidkpiois yiyverar THY popiwy ody ws TwWeES 
4 BARES 
droAapPavovor, dia TO medvKevar depecbar To 
15 Gpovov. mpos TO Spovov (pds yap moAAais. a. 
e c / e ” sb 
ais 6 Adyos otros exer Svayxepetas, cvpBaiver 
xXwpis Exaotov yiveobar TOV popiwy tBv opmovo- 
pep@v, olov dora Kal? atta Kat vedpa, Kat tas 
a > ey ” > a ; , | 
adpxas Kal’ abrds, et tis drodeEairo Tadtyy Thy 
airtav), add’ dre TO mepirrwua 7d Tod OiAEos 
/ af D5 e / \ ee) a vs 
20 duvdpec ToLwodrév eoriw olov dvae To C@ov, Kat 
” , \ , > , > itu yt 8 A 
éveott Suvduer Ta propia, evepyeia 8° opbev, Sid 
TavTny THY aitlay yiveTar ExacTov adT@v, Kal OTL 
TO TounTiKOV Kal TO TabnTiKOV, Gtav Olywow, dv 
TpOTroy €oTi TO ev TouTiKOV TO Se mabyTiKdy (Tov 
‘ A 
dé tpdmov A€yw TO Ws Kat ob} Kal dt), EvOdS TO 
a ati | 
25 ev Trove TO O€ Taoxer. VAnY pev Odv TAapeyeL TO 

1 seclusi: suspicatus est Platt: tov adrov . . . tpodqs Om. ee 

* This phrase seems to be an interpolation, connected 
perhaps with ll. 29-31 below. 

> This commonplace of thought in Greek philosophy and 
medicine is a pseudo-scientific form of a proverbial maxim 
(cf. “birds of a feather ’’), specially alluring to the Greeks, 
Cf. especially Hippocrates, 7. dvovos zaidiov, ch. 17 init. and 
Jin. (vii. 496-498 Littré). See quotation in note on 742 a 1. 

198 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. rv. 

after all it is not true to say that all the nourishment 
_ comes from outside. In the seeds of plants there is 
some nutritive matter, which at first has a milky 
appearance ; and it may be that in the same way, 
in the material of the animal, the residue left over 
from its construction is present as nourishment for it 
from the outset. . 

» So then, the fetation’s growth is supplied through 
the umbilicus in the same way that a plant’s growth 
is supplied through its roots [and also as that of 
animals is, when they have been separated, from 
the nourishment which is in themselves].* Of these 
matters we shall have to speak later.at the appropriate 
occasions in our discussions. As for the differentia- 
tion of the various parts: this is not due, as some 
Loe det any natural law that “like makes its way 
to-like.”® - This theory involves quite a number of 
difficulties, one being that if you accept it as stating 
a valid reason, it follows that each of the “ uniform ”’ 
parts, such as bones, and sinews, and flesh, is formed 
separately, each one all on its own. . The true reason 
why each of these parts is formed is that the residue 
provided by the female is potentially the same in 
character as the future animal will be, according to 
its nature ; and although none of ‘the parts is present 
in, actuality in that residue, they are all there, potenti- 
ally. A further reason is this.. When a pair of 
factors, the one active and the other passive, come 
into contact in the way in which one is active and the 
other passive (by “ way’ I mean the manner, the 
_ place, and the time of the contact), then immediately 
__ both are brought into play, the one acting, the other 
_ being acted upon. In this case, it is the female which 
‘ 
¥ 

provides the matter, and the male which provides the 
199 

740 b 

741 a 

30 

35 

5 
V 

ARISTOTLE (Pe ov 

OnAv, TY Oi apxny THS KWTEWS TO |appev. ‘WoTrep 
de ta bd Ths Téxvns ywopeva yiverar Sid TOV 
opydvew, €oTt 8° ddnbearepov eimrety dua Tis Koy 
cews avr av, avrn 8° €or evépyera THS TEXYNS, 
7 de Téxvy jLopdy) TOV ywopevwy av adAw, ovrws 
7 Tis Open ruts puxtis dvvapius, | aorep wad ev 
avrois Tots fous Kal Tots gurois DoTEpov eK THS 
tpodpis zrovet my avénow, Xpwpevn ofov Spydvous 
Depuornre Kat puxpornre (ev yap tovro.s 7 omots 
exelyns, Kal Ady Twi EKaoToV yiverat), obras Kal 
ef apyijs auviornot TO dice yeyvopevov Hh yap 
abty €otw An 7h avEdverau Kat €€ as ovviorarat 
TO mp@rov, OTE Kal 7) movoboa Suvapus 7 TadTo [re 
ef dpxiis: peilay de avrn cori)": obyv. avTn 
eoTiv uv Opener) bux, adrn €oTt Kal 7) yewaoa: 
Kal Tob’ éotiv u poous 7) €KdoTov, evuTdpxovoa 
KaL ev purois Kal eév Cdous Tmaow. Ta e Gada 
Hedpea Ths yuxis Tots pev dbrdpyer rots oe _obX 
dmdpxet TOV Cabvreov. 

‘Ey pev ovv Tos purots ov KEXUpLOT aL 70 OAAv 
Tob appevos: ev d€ Tots L@ous ev ols REX PLOT AL, 
mpoodeita TO OHA Tod appevos,*| KaiTo. Tis amo-= 

* séclusi. | peilov .. . éoriv Secl. A.-W., qui et rab76" 7@ 
e€ apyns yervicarti €orw: Btf. rH €€ dpyfs [p- <I. 

2 Cdvrwy Peck: Cowv vulg.:, cf. 731 a 31, ubi PY Cdwv 
pro layrwy : in quibusdam corporibus quae vivunt &. 

3 +6 OjAv Tod dppevos Peck, docente Platt: rod OnAeos To 
dppev vulg. 

* Cf. 734 b 36 ff. and PA, 640 a,32. 

» See App. B §§ 6, 9, 15. 

¢ Cf Phys. 192 b 21 ff. cis aon: THS dvcews apxiis Tivos Kal 
airlas rod Kwetcbar Kai jpepeiv . . . 32 ddaw 8€ Exer 600 Tovadryy 

200 

. GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. t.-v. 

principle of movement. Now the products which are 
formed by human art are formed by means of instru- 
ments, or rather it would be truer to say they are / 
formed by means of the movement of the instruments, 
and this movement is the activity, the actualization, 
of the art, for by “ art ” we mean the shape of the 
products which are formed, though it is resident 
elsewhere than in the products themselves.* The 
dynamis of the nutritive Soul behaves in the same 
way. Just as, in the independently existing animal 
or plant, this Soul, which uses heat and cold as its 
instruments (for it is in these that its movement sub- 
sists,® each several thing being formed according to 
some definite logos), ata later stage produces growth 
out of the nourishment supplied, so in precisely the 
same way at the very outset, this Soul, while the 
natural object is being formed, causes it to be set and 
constituted ; since, as the matter from which the ob- 
ject derives its growth is identical with that out of 
which it was originally set and constituted, so too 
the dynamis which fashions the object is identical. 
If, then, this is the nutritive Soul, this it is which 
also generates the object. .And this part of Soul 
it is which is the “nature” of each several object,’ 
being present alike in plants and in animals one and 
all, whereas the other parts of Soul,* while present 
in some living things, are absent from others. 

Now in plants the female is not separate from (@ why the 
the male; in certain of the animals, however, it is coe 
_ separate, and here, in addition, it has need of the generate 
_ male. And yet anyone might well raise the puzzle, 4°"~ 

¢ exe apx7v, and De caelo 301 b 17 dvos pev eorw 7 & airg 
___-Umdpyouca xuwicews apyn. See also Introd. § 42. 
4 See Introd. § 43. 

a 201 

741 a 

ARISTOTLE OLTAASVA 

puns dv da tiv’ airiav. magn ‘€xer 7d OFjAv 
THY a proxi Kat 7) tA To mepirr copies 76 708 
Canens €oTt, TL T PASAT Too GPPRYOS. ar odK 
adro. €€ atrod yewa 7rd OAdv;  aitwv 8 tu 
10 Stam pet TO ad TOO puree aiaOnoee addvarov 
be TPOLOTOY y xeipa 7 odpka clvar 7 a Mo 3 Tt 
Hépior [7 Evosiawis odafazueia oxi vi  HERYEE 
7 eevee Kal 4 7 7) amA@s* €orar yap otov 
vekpos 7) pee te at ie et odv 70 dppev ork TO 
Tihs TOLBUTIS ROT UCAY buys, Omov kexepuaras 
15 TO OfAv Kal TO appa advvarov TO OAdv adro e€ 
avtoo te BPoy To ‘yap eter ey Hv 76 dppew’ 
elvat- eet OTe y’ exer Adyov 7 AexBetoa drropia, 
Payepbniie em TOV puso TOV TA, mbites TUKTOV- 
aur; ore dvvarat pexpe yé twos 70 OAV yevvay. 
ert 8 Exyeu Kal TobTO i ie TOS TIS adrov Ming 
20 da dyoe Civ. ovre yap oUTwSs Ws TA, youre. oa 
evdexeTat (eydyvero yap: av e& abrév evepyeta 
FLYUXor) ) 0880 otras worep Evrov 7 7 AiBos.” gore 
yap Kal ToUTwY TaV Wav Plopa Tis Ws [eT eXOVT@ 
tpomov. twa Cwihs apdtepov. dHAov obv ore ed 
twa Svvaprec proxy. trotav ov ga a ; avayen 
25 83) THY eoxaTny. atryn d eotiv 7 Openruxt}: avTn 

1 dppex. Ss appev vulg. 

$ Of, 132-313, nD. 
> The production of sentient Soul. 

202 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v. 

to what cause this is due. Granted that the female 
possesses the same Soul (as the male) and that the 
residue provided by the female is the material (for 
the fetation), why has the female any need of the 
male in addition? Why does not the female accom- 
plish generation all by itself and from itself? The 
reason is that there is a difference between animal 
and plant: the animal possesses sense-perception.* 
It is impossible for any part of the body whatever 
(face, hand, flesh, etc.) to exist unless sentient Soul 
is present in it, whether i actuality or potentially, 
whether in some qualified sense or without qualifica- 
tion. Otherwise what we have will be on a. par 
with a dead body or a dead limb. Thus, if the 
male is the factor which produces the sentient Soul 
in cases where male and female are separate, it is 
impossible for the female all by itself and from itself 
to generate an animal; because the faculty just 
mentioned’ is the essence of what is meant by 
“male.” Still, it is not at all unreasonable to raise 
the puzzle we have stated, as is shown by the instance 
of those birds which lay wind-eggs: this proves that 
up to a point the female is able to generate. But 
there is a puzzle here too: In what sense are we to 
say that these eggs are alive? We cannot say that 
they are alive in the same sense as fertile eggs, for 
in that case an actual living creature would hatch out 
from them; nor are they on a par with wood and 
stone, because these eggs go bad just as fertile ones 
do, and this seems to indicate that to start with they 
were in some way alive. Hence it is clear that 
potentially they possess Soul of a sort. What sort, 
then? The lowest, it must be, obviously; and+this 
is nutritive Soul, because this it is which is present 

203 

741 a 

741 b 

ARISTOTLE! | 6/100 

yap drdpxet maow opolws Cdous TE kat urois. 
dua Ti odv ovK amorehet, Ta popia Kal TO Gov; 
ore det aloOnrucny abrd exew pox: od yap corw 
aarrep gutToo Ta Hopta. TOV Saun. duo Setrau Tis 
Tod dppevos Kowwvias* KEK pLOTAL yap. ev ToUTous 

30 To dppev. O7rep at oupBaiver: TO. yap darnve pia. 

yiverat yovyna, édy év Tove KaLpg TO dppev €70- 
xevon. GAdd mepl pev THS TOUTWY aiTias. lian 
Suoprabjcerar. 

Ee 8 €oTe Te yevos 6 OfAv pev eorw, FP 8d 
my exel KEXWPLOMEVOY, evoexXEeTat robro! C@ov e€€ 
abtobd yevvav. Omep akioTictws pev od avv@rrat 

35 expe ye Tod Kbv, Trove dé Svordlew (évea)® 3 ev TO 

/ 
yever TH TOV ixOev- Tv yap KaAoupevey épu- 
Opivey a appnv pev odbeis aarat 77, OjAevat dé Kal 
KunpdTwv mAnpers. GAAd TOUTWY Lev OUTW TeEipay 
»” > /, td \ 7 yy +” ‘ 
exopev agvomugrov, oure be OnjAea ovre dppeva, Kat 
ev 7@ Tov tyOdwv yever corly, ofov ai 7 éyxeAes 
Kal yevos Tt KEOTPEwV Trepl TOUS TeAwarvaious 770- 
Tapous. ev doors. be KEXG PLOT at 7o OAXv Kat ‘70 
dppev, advvatov avTo Kal’ atto 70 OAAv yevvay eis 

1 dvev dxeias addit P. 2 <éa> Hackforth. 

¢ See 750 b 3 ff., 757 b 1 ff., also 730 a 5 ff. and H.A, 
539 b 1. 

> Probably some species of Serranus, perhaps S. sith 
(a sea-perch). Cf. H.A, 538. a 21, 567 a 27. _ Actually the 
majority of species of Serranus are hermaphrodite (see E. S. 
Goodrich, Cyclostomes and Fishes, 430), as was discovered 
by Cavolini in the latter part of the 18th cent. See A.-W., 
Introduction, pp. 32 ff. 

©: 414.5 ;T0e. 

4 Fels do not develop generative organs except in deep 
water, whither they go in order to breed. This is taken to 

204 

i 
7 
‘ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v. 

alike in all animals and plants. Why then does this 
Soul fail to bring the parts to their completion and so 

produce an animal? Because the parts of an animal 

are bound to possess sentient Soul, since they are not 
on a par with those of a plant ; and that is why the 
male is required to take its share in the business (the 
male being separate from the female in such animals). 
The facts bear this out: wind-eggs become fertile 
if the male treads the female within a certain period. 
However, the cause of these things will be fully deter- 
mined later on.* 

If there is any class.of animal which is female and 
has no separate male, it is possible that this generates 
offspring from itself...This has not so far been 
reliably observed, it is true, but some instances in the 
class of fishes give cause to suspect. that it may be 
the case. Thus, of the fish known as erythrinus? 
not a single male specimen has so far been ob- 
seryed, whereas female ones have been, full of 
fetations.©’ But although with regard to these we 
have no reliable proof so. far, there are ‘also in the 
class of fishes some which are neither male nor fe- 
male: e.g., eels,? and one sort of cestreus * which 
frequents marshland rivers. In all animals, how- 
ever, where the male and female are separate, 
the female is unable by itself to generate offspring 

indieate that they are descended from an original deep- 
water fish. See additional note, p. 565. : 

© This cannot be the grey mullet ( Mugil capito, Cuv.), but 
is probably a species of Muraena or Gymnotus. In PA. 
696 a 5, Aristotle speaks of a cestreus found in the lake at 
Siphae in Boeotia, on the south coast, near Thespiae (now 
Tipha). Cf. also the reference at 763 b 1 to Pyrrha, where 
there was a lagoon which was apparently one of Aristotle’s 
favourite spots for studying animals. 

205 

ARISTOTLE | Cra) 

741 b 
téXos* 70 yap dppev pany av Ys H 5é pdous oddev 

5 moet pdrny. Ovdrrep € €v Tois Tovovrous ael TO Gppev 
emiTeAet T7)V yeveow. epirovet yap TOUTO TH ai- | 
oPyruciy puy7y, 7 80 adrod 7 bia Tis yovijs. 
evuTapyovT@ 5” ev TH vAn Svvdper TOV Hopiwy, 
OTav apy? yevnrat KUjoEws, Gomep ev Tots avto- 
parows Gavpacr, guveiperat TO epetiis: Kal 6 Bos- 
10 Aovras Adyew Ties TOV puaikay, TO " $épea8 ‘au ets 
70 dpovov,’ Aexréov ody os TOTFOV peraBddovra 
Ta popia kwetobar, aAXa pevovra Kat aMovovpeva 
padaxornre Kal oxAnpornte Kal xpwpacr Kal Tats 
ddAaus Tais Tay Spovopep@v Svadopais, ywopeva 
15 evepyeia a dmrhpxev evra. Suvdpeet mporepov. yly- 
veTau be mp@rov U apy. avrn S° eoriv 7) ta. 
Tots evaipos, Tots 8’ aNous 70 avddoyov, worep 
eipntar aoAAdKis. Kal todro davepdy od pdvov 
Kata Thv atcOnow, ore yiverar mp@tov, adAa Kal 
mept THY TeAcvTHV: azroAcimer yap TO Chv evrebOev 
20 reAevraiov, ovPaiver 8° emi mavrwy TO TeAevTatov 
ywopevov" mpOrov aoAcimew, TO 5€ mp@rov TeAev- 
tatov, womep THs gvoews SiavAodpopovens Kal 

1 yevopevov P. 

* j.¢., the matter provided by the female. 

> See note on 734 b 10. 

° dvaixoi, sometimes dvovodAdyor, a term used by Aristotle 
to describe the early writers on dvovs, 7.¢., nature, or the 
nature (stuff) of the universe and its contents. They include 
the so-called ‘“‘ early philosophers,” and apparently also 
Hippocrates, as here (see note on 740 b 14). Several of the 
pre-Socratic philosophers had made use of this principle in 
various connexions.—See also pp. xvi f. 

@ Of. above, 740 b 14. & See Introd. § 48. 
f See App. B §§ 4-6, 9-10. 
206 

q 

ey 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v. 

and bring it to completion: if it could, the exist- 
ence of the male would have no purpose, and Nature 
does nothing which lacks purpose. Hence in such 
animals the male always completes the business of 
generation—it implants sentient Soul, either acting 
by itself directly or by means of semen. As the’ 
parts of the animal ‘to be formed are present poten- 
tially in ‘the matter,* once the principle of move- 
ment has been supplied, one thing follows on after 
another without interruption, just as it does in the 
“ miraculous ’’ automatic puppets.? And the mean- 
ing of the statement, made by some of the physio- 
lo ers,” about like “‘ making its way to like,” ¢ must be 
taken to be not that the parts of the body “ move ” 
in the sense of changing their position, but that while 
remaining in the same position they undergo “ altera- 
tion "4 as regards softness, hardness, colour, and the 
other differences which belong to. the uniform parts ; 
that is, they become im. actuality what previously all 
along they had been potentially. The first to be formed 
is the “ principle,” which in blooded animals is the 
heart and in the others the counterpart of the heart, 
as I have said many times over. There can be no 
doubt about this, because our senses tell us that it 
is the first thing formed ; but the truth of it is con- 
firmed by what happens when the creature dies : the 
heart is the place where life fails last of all; and we 
find universally that what is the last to be formed is 
the first to fail, and the first to be formed is the last 
to fail.’ Itis as though Nature were a runner, coyer- 
ing a double course there and back, and retracing her 

2 Cor primum vivens ultimum moriens: cf. Ebstein et al., 
Mitt. zur Gesch. der Medizin und Naturw. 19 (1920), 102, 
219, 305. 

207 

741 b 

VI 25 

ARISTOTLE i) 

dvedurropevns € él ry apxny bev 7Abev. » €ore ‘yap 
Wy pev yevenrs eK TOO 1) ovros ets 70 dv, 7) de 
plopa ex Tod ovTos mad els TO BY ov. 
Tiverau dé pera. THY apxnv, woTep eAexOn, Ta 
evTos mporepov Tav extos. galverat Se - “mporepa 
Ta. peyebos. € EXOVTA TAY eharrovav, ovd éma yuy- 
vojeva. TpOTEpov. m™p@rov dé ta avw Siaphpodras 
Too Sualaparos, Kat duadeper meyer To S€ KaTw 
Kat €Aarrov Kal ddiopvordrepov. Kat TobTo ‘ylyve- 

30 Tat év maow, doors TO avw KaL TO karen Sudbpiorar, 

TAnv év Tots eVTOHOLS* Toure 8° ev Tots oKwAnko- 
TOKOUHLEVOUS eml TO avw % avénois yiverau: 70 
yap ava €€ drapxijs eAarTov. dduopraTov d€ Kal 
TO dvw Kad TO Karen Tois padaxkious Tay smopeu- 
TiK@Y pLovois. TO dé AcyOev cupBaiver Kai emi TOV 
puT@v, TO mpotepeiv TH yeveoes TO advw KUTOS TOD 
Kdtwhev: ras yap pilas mpdrepov adiaou Ta o7ép- 
para t&v mropbwy. 
Avopi€erat 5€ Ta pépn Tv Cawv mvedpari, od 
pevToL oUTE TH THS yevvwons ovTe TH abrod,, 

* See 740 a 12 ff. 

» Aristotle’s observations are quite correct. Cf. the 
theories of C. M. Child on axial gradients, physiological 
dominance (ef. Aristotle’s own use of xdpios, 742 a 34 below), 
etc., conveniently discussed by J. Huxley and G. R. de Beer 
in Hlements of Experimental Embryology. See also 742 b 14. 

* According to Aristotle (J. 4. 705 a 29 ff.), the distinction 
between the upper and lower portions of animals and plants 
is determined by function, and not by position relative to the 
earth and the sky. The “ upper ” portion is that from which 
is received the distribution of nourishment and material for 
growth; and the extremity towards which the nourishment 
and growth penetrate is the “‘ lower’ extremity. Thus, as 

208 

_ ___ GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v.-v1. 

steps towards the starting-point whence she set out. 
The process of formation, genesis, starts from not- 
being and advances till it reaches being; that of 
_ decay starts from being and goes back again till it 
_~~reaches not-being. 
_. After the“ principle ” is formed, the other parts VI 
are formed, the internal ones earlier than the exter- @ Develop: 
nal, as I have said.*. The larger parts become. visible, embryo 
however, earlier than the smaller ones, although some Craneedy 
of them are not in fact formed earlier. First the 
parts above the diaphragm become articulated, and 
_ these are larger in size, whereas that which is below 
_ is smaller and less clearly defined.’ This happens in 
_ all cases where the upper and the lower portions ° 
are definite and distinct, except Insects: in those 
Insects which are produced as larvae, the increase 
occurs towards the upper part, as this is smaller to 
begin with. The only locomotive animals in which 
there is no definite distinction between the upper 
and lower portions are the Cephalopods.? What has 
been said here applies to plants as well: the forma- 
tion of the upper portion precedes that of the lower : 
seeds send out their roots before their shoots.@ 
Now the parts of animals are differentiated by 
means of pneuma’; but this is not the pneuma of the 
mother, nor that of the creature itself, as some of 

he says (705 b 6), in plants, the roots are the “ upper” 
portion, since it is through their roots that plants get their 
nourishment, just as animals do through the mouth. Cf. 
the end of the present paragraph, 741 b 34 ff.; also the 
passage in P.A. 686 b 21 ff. 

4 Because (720 b 18, P.A. 684 b 15, 685 a 1) their back- 
part is drawn up on to the front-part, their tail-end is bent 
right over to meet the front, and in consequence the residual 
vent is brought close to the mouth. : 

* See note on 741 b 30. * See’App. B §§ 7 ff. 

209 

742a 

or 

10 

15 

/ ARISTOELE OFT AS AMD 

Kabanep tTiwes tOv dvorkdv daciv. davepov de 
TOUTO emt TMV dpvibwy Kal t&v iyOvav Kal TOv 
3 ion i miele bess Send 
evTOM@Vv. Ta pev yap xwpicbevta THs yevvar 
, pie > ee ee A Re pet GE yer bh TA Sc 
yiwerat €€ @od, ev & AapBdve ry diaplpwow: Ta 
3° dAws od« avarvel tav Cwv, oxwdAnkoroxeirat 5é 
\ > a ‘ > > Pind ae = o 
Kal @oTroKketra Ta 8 avarvéovra Kal év TH pirpa 
AapBdvorra thy SiapOpwow odk avarvel mplv 7 6 
TAcKpuew AdBy rédos* StapOpobrar Sé Kat obros Kal 
, : Far + (Se 5. 
Ta. €umpootey popia mpw avamvetv, ert i doa. 
7 pil i Gait ; 3 Has heey 
moAvexid4, TeV TeTpaTddwy, olov xkiwr A€wy AdKOS 
dAcharng Gus, ravra tupAa yea, Kat Suierarat. TO 
‘ M4 7 Fond . 
Brédapov yevouevwy torepov, wore SHAov ore Tov 
adrov tpdrov Kai ev tots dAdo mGot, KaBdrep Kai 
: i Ty ‘Sk JiGTSs Oe. EES 
TO ToLoV, Kal TO TOGOV yiveTat SuVapLEt TpoUTapXor, 
evepyeia 8 vatepov, b1o Tdy ad’tav aitiwy. tb 
@vrep Kal Td movyv Stopilerat, Kal yiyverar duo. eé 
evds. veda 8 brdpyew avayKatov, ort bypov Kat 
Bepprov, Tod pev Trovodvros, ToD S€ maoyYovTos.’ 
a > 3 / \ Xj efi) Aw , 
Tév & dpyaiwy twes dvovordywv Ti fuera Ti 
yiyvetat TOV popiwy ererpdbncav A€yew, od Atav 
eEuTreipiK@s €xovTes, TOV ovpPawevtwy.. TOY. yap 

ieee 

1 $¢ P: yap vulg. 

“ See note on 741,.b.10.. @g., Hippocrates, 2. ¢dvdovs 
madiou 17 (vii. 496-498 Littré) 7 d€. cape: adéopevn, bo, 700 
mvevparos apOpodrar, Kal Epyerau ev adrtén Exacrov TO dpowv ws 
TO Gpovov . . . SvapOpodrar bd THs mvofs Exacta, dvowpeva yap 
duiorara: £bp7avra Kata cvyyéverav.. Cf. also ch, 19, Accord- 
ing to this treatise the embryo both received nourishment 
and breathed through, the umbilicus (cf. chh, 13,)15). 

» Viz., birds. © Viz., fishes and insects, 

4 Viz:,/Vivipara. 

210 

q 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vr. 

: the physiologers * allege. This. point is clear in the 

ease of birds, fishes, and insects: thus, some” of 
these are formed out of an egg, after separation from 
the mother, and it is in the egg that they get their 
articulation ; and some animals ° do not breathe at 
all, but are produced as larvae or as eggs ; others,” 
which both breathe and get their articulation within 
the uterus, do not however breathe until their lungs. 
have reached completion : with them, both the lungs 
and the preceding parts become articulated before 
they breathe. Further, the polydactylous quadru- 
peds (such as the dog, the lion, the wolf, the fox 
and the jackal) all bring forth their young blind, and 
the eyelid: does not separate until some time after 
birth. Hence it is clear that, with regard to all the 
other parts as well, the-same holds. just as the 
characteristics of quality are there potentially to 
begin with and later on are formed in actuality, so 
too those of quantity are formed—by the same causes 
as those by which the characteristics of quality are 
differentiated, and two things are formed out of a 

_ single one.’ © As for pneuma, its presence is the result 

of necessity, because liquid substance and hot sub- 
stance are present, one being ‘active and the other 
being acted upon.’ 

Some of the early physiologers endeavoured to 
describe the order in which the various parts are 
formed, but they were none too well acquainted with 
what actually happens. As with everything else, so 

* e.g., twoeyelids ; an example of a potential duality being 
actualized.—See also App. B § 7, n. i H 

? i.¢., the pneuma is not éreicaxrov, but adpdurov, derived 
from within, and hence can serve as an “ instrument” (see 
789 b 3 ff.) charged with a specific “‘ movement’ (see Introd. 
§ 68, and App. B, esp. § 32). 

211 

ARISTOTLE 
742 4 s i Me ak oh Ay 
Lopiwy, domep Kal emt THv GAwv, wépuKev Erepov 
20 €répov mpdtepov. Td d€ mpdTepov dn ToAAaXas 
eoTv. Td TE yap 00 EveKa Kal TO ToUTOV EveKa 
duadeper, Kal TO pev TH yeveoe. mpdTepov adtav 
€oTt, TO d€ TH ovata. Svo S€ diadopas exer Kal 
TO ToUTOU' éveKa* TO pev yap eoTw dev 7 KiVyats, 
TO Sé @ XpHrat TO od evexa. A€yw 8 olov TO TE 
25 yevynTikov Kal TO OpyaviKoV TO yevvapevey’* TOUTWY 
yap TO wev vrdpyew Set mpdTepov, TO TOLNTLKOY, 
olov ro diddéav*® tod pavOdvoytos, tods 8’ adAovds 
votepov Tod avOdvovtos adrciv: mEeplepyov yap Ha) 

émuoTtapevois avdreiv dmdpyew addovs.  TpLa@v 
dvtwv, évos prev Tod TéAous, d Aéyouev elvar od 
évexa, Sevtépov 8€ ta&v TovToU Eveka THs apxis 
30 Tis KWYTUAS Kal yervntiKns (TO yap mMoinTUKOV 
Kal yevvntiKdv, fh TowdTa, mpos TO TroLovpeEVvoV 
ore Kal yervebjevov), tplrov S€ tod xpyoipov Kal 
@ xpira 7 TéAos, mpOtov pev drdpxew avayKatov 
fi pdpiov ev @ 1 apy) THS Kwhoews (Kal yap 
ev0ds tTotto' pdpidv €ott Tov TéAoUs EV Kal KU- 
35 pudTarov), éerta peta TobTO TO OAov Kal TO TEAoS, 
tpirov Sé Kat teAcuraioy Ta dpyaviKa rovrous Hepn 

\ : ES / a > w ~ 
mpos évias xpyoeis. wor el Te TOLOUTOY EOTLY, 
1 zodrou PS: ob vulg. 0 
2 verrwperw L: yevouéev vulg. 
) 2’ §.Ségor Richards. 
4 fort. rodro 76 (Z1*) scribendum, et mox év<exa>. 

@ Of. Met. 1035 b 18 ff. 

> This will be modified in a moment, when Aristotle sub- 
divides this heading. Some of the things which are for the 
sake of the End are posterior to it in point of formation. 

¢ By this, as appears from 742 b 13, 14 below, is meant the 
‘* upper portion,” the head and trunk. 

212 

i eee 
Se 

Eee 

——————————— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IL. vt. 

_ with the parts of the body : one is, by nature, prior 

to another.* But the term “prior” at once com- 
prises a variety of meanings. £.g., take the differ- 
ence between (a) that for the sake of which a thing 
is, and (6) that thing which is for its sake: of these, 
one (6) is prior in point of formation,” while the 
other (a) is prior in point of being or reality. 

Further, “‘ that which is for the sake of the End” 
comprises two divisions : (i) that whence the move- 
ment is derived and (ii) that which is employed by 
the End ; ; or, in other words, (i) something which 
generates, and (ii) something which serves as an 
instrument for what is generated. Of the two, 
the productive factor must exist prior to the other: 

e.g-, a teacher must exist prior to a learner, while 
pipes are posterior to the person who is learning to 
play them : it is superfluous for people who cannot 
play pipes to possess them. So we have these three 
things : (1) the End, which we describe as being that 
Sor the sake of which (other things are) ; (2) the things 
which are for the sake of the End, .viz., the activat- 
ing and generative principle (second, because the 
existence of that which is productive and generative, 
qua such, is relative to what it produces and gener- 
ates); (3) the things which are serviceable, which 
can be and are employed by the End. Thus, first of 
all there must of necessity exist some part in which 
the principle of movement resides (for of course 
this is a part of the End, and the supreme con- 
trolling part of it); after that comes the animal as a 

_ whole, z.e.,the End¢; third and last of all come the 

_ parts which serve these % as instruments for various 

employments. _ Ifit is true, then, that there is a part 

# Or perhaps “ this,” referring only to the “ End.” 
213 

742 b 

ARISTOTLE 

ome p dvayKatov Darcie ev tots Caois, ro\mdons 
exov THs dvoews a dpxny Kal thos, TOURe yiveoBau 
TPHTOY avaykatov, 7} fev KWyTUKOY, mp@rovs H be 
Hiptoy Tov tédXovs, Here Tod Odov.. wore TOV 
[opiwy' TOV sitet es 600 Hey €ort Li Singin eid 

5 i ie ael TPOmEOOE det B prdépycas avrd (dAov yap 

EVEKG. EoTW ws’, apxy), doa de: pa) TOLadTAa. TOV 
aAXov eveca, sailed 510 od pdd.ov dveAetv dectaee 
TmpoTepa TOV Hppieae, doa aAdov Evexa, " od® évexa 

WALID 

Tava. OPERAETAS! yap Ta KWYTUKA THY poplav 
A ati ath ovTa 7H parece Tob téAovs, Ta Se Sh 

10 TiKa mpds TA Bp yoaltiee dieAciv od stam Katrot 

KaTa Nae” TV Heneeor det tnreiv. rt yiveran pera 
Ti: TO yap TéAos eviwy ev vorepov, eviwv dé mpo- 
repon! Kat 81a’ TooTO pach pev 0 exov T7v 
OPXUP, reayae poplor, er” exo HEC, TO dva KUTOS. 
810, TA mreph Thy, Kepaadny. Kal TA oppara peywora 

15 kat’ dapyas ponents Trois epBpvois, Ta de KATH 

Too an an tel otov Ta K@da, mes Tod yap ave 
Ta Kdrw evexev, Kal obre pdpia Tod Tédovs ovTeE 
yevvynriKa avTod. {f 

Od Kadds 5é€ Adyovow O88 TOO Bid af THY 

L ds P: cs 9 vulg. 2 0d] dv P. 1 

@ 46., generative | of other parts, as the heart is. ‘ 
¥ Or, reading 7 dpx7, “just as the first principle is for the 
sake of the End.” 

214 

———— Xk elt 

GENERATION OF ‘ANIMALS, Il. vi. 

_ of this kind—a part which contains the first principle 

and the End of the animal’s whole nature—which , 
must of necessity be present.in an animal, then this 
part must of necessity be formed first of all_formed 
first, qua activating, though formed along with the 
whole creature, qua being a part of the End. Thus, 
those instrumental parts which are in, their nature 
generative * must always be there themselves prior 
to. the rest, because they are for the sake of something 
else, as being a first: principle ® ; ‘those’ parts which, 
although’ they are for the sake of something else, are 
te generative, come later, .That. is. why it, is not 
y to determine whether those parts are “ prior ” 
which are for the sake of something else, or that part 
for whose sake these others are present. The activat- 
ing parts intrude themselves into the picture, because 
in formation they are prior to the End.;, and it is not 
easy to determine as between the activating and the 
instrumental parts. Still, this is the line we must 
follow in trying to find out the order in which they 
are formed ; for the End, though it comes after some 
of them, is prior to others. And on this aecount the 
part which contains the first principle is the first to 
be formed; then follows the upper portion of the 
body ; and that is why in embryos we see that the 
parts round the head and eyes are, the, largest at 
the outset, while. the parts below the umbilicus, for 
instance the legs, are small. The reason is that the 
lower portions are for the sake of the upper portion, 
and they are not parts,of the End* nor are they 

concerned in generating it... 
* People who say, like Democritus < Abdeta, that 

¢ See above,.742 a 35, 743 b 13, 1h Rare are merely 
useful adjuncts, enabling it to move ‘about, etc 

215 

ARISTOTLE |) (004 

742 b ‘ 
audyKy, 6oou A€yovow 67 obtws Gael viverauy! Kal 

20 ravTnv elvae vopilovaw dpxiy ev adrots, womep 
AupoKprTgs r) “ABonpirns, ort TOO bev [det rea]! 
drreipov ovK €oTw 4pxns 76 8é Sud. ri dpxn, TO 8° 
dei dmeipov, Wate TO epwrdv TO bid Ti mEpL TeV 
TOLWUTWY TWOS TO oyreiv elvat highs Tob iGiretpou 
apyynv. Kaito. Kata TodTov TOV Aoyov, | Kal? dv 

25 dgvobat 70 Sua Ti pr) Lyreiv, odBevos drddeuets 
€oTat TOV aidiwv: paiverar 8 otaa moar, TOV 
Lev ywouevwv det trav & dvtwv, eel Kal TO Tpi- 
ywvov éxew Svow dpbais toas det Kat Td TH 
Suduetpov daovppetpov elvat mpos tiv mAevpav 
aidvov, GAN’ Guws eotiv abtadv airy te Kal amo- 

30 detkts. 70 prev odv pu) TavTwv akvobv Cyreiv apynv 
Aeyerat KAAS, TO b€ TOV OvTwWY adel Kal yoyo peavey 
mavrav ov Kan@e, ann’ doa THY adic dpyat 
Tuyxdvougiy otvoat" THs yap dpxiis ddAn yuaous Kab 
ovK amdderéis. apyn 5 €v pev Tois axwiyrois TO 

1 secl. Platt. 

@ Cf. Met. 1011 a 13 dmodeiéews yap apy?) otk amddekis 
corw. Also Anal. Post. 90 b 24 ff. at apyai trav amobeifecv 
Gpropot, cy OTL OvK EgovTat drrodetfeus dedeuxrar ™parepov: 4 
Eoovrat at dpxat dmroderxral Kal TOY ap Ov ap at + 8s opiopos 

pev yap Tod Ti é€art Kal ovaias. See also 72 20 ff.; also 
‘Met. 1013 a 15 (one of the definitions of apy) ere oBev 
yewoTov 76 mpayya mpdrov, kal avtn apy?) Aéyerar Tod mpdy- 
paros, olov Tay asrodelE ew ai drobéoeis. In #th. N. 1142 a 26 
it is said to be “‘ intelligence ” (vods) which apprehends de- 
finitions that cannot be proved by reasoning. Aristotle also 
speaks there of “the sort of intuition ’’ (aio@no1s) where- 

216 

EEE 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IT. vr. 

“this is how they are always formed,” and regard 
this as a starting-point (first principle) in these cases, 
make a mistake, nor do they even succeed in stating 
the necessity involved in the cause. Their argument 
is this: What is limitless has no starting-point ; but the 
éause is a starting-point, and what is always is limit- 
less ; therefore (says Democritus) to ask for a cause 
in connexion with anything of this kind (sc., anything 
that always is) is the same as trying to discover a 
starting-point in something that is limitless. Yet on 
this line of argument, on the strength of which they 
undertake to dispense with trying to discover the 
cause, there will be no demonstration of any single 
one of the “ eternal ”’ things. It is obvious, however, 
that demonstrations of many of these (some of them 
things which always come to be, some things which 
always are) do in fact exist. For instance, the angles 
of a triangle are always equal to two right angles, 
and the diagonal of a square is always incommensur- 
able with the side ; in both of these cases we have 
something “ eternal,’ yet there is a cause for them 
and they are demonstrable. Thus it is right to say 
that we cannot undertake to try to discover a starting- 
point (a first principle) in all things and everything ; 
but it is not right to deny the possibility in the case 
of all the things that always are and that always come 
to be ; it is impossible only with the first principles 
of the eternal things, for of course the first principle 
does not admit of demonstration, but is apprehended 
by another mode of cognition. Now with those 
things that are “immutable,” the first principle is 

by we perceive that the ultimate figure in mathematics is a 

_ triangle. Again (1143 b 1) in demonstrations, voids appre- 

hends the immutable (dxivnra) and primary definitions. 
217 

742 b 

743 a 

(ARISTOTLE)! PA 8050 
Ti eat, ev dé ToIs ywvopievors: 789 aetous, Tpomov 

> 
35 8 GAAov Kat od maou Tov ‘abrov Gv pia’ rév 

dpiOdv, bev 7 Kivnots or. 80d ndvra Th 
Evora Kapdiav EXEL TPOTOV, donep. een Kear” 
apxyds* €v dé tots dAdo TO sHcAnON yiveTaL TH 
Kapdia mpa@rtov. oid 23 neal 

"Ek Se ris Kapdias at dAeBes Suaréravrae! wal 
darep ot Tods KavdBous ypdpovres” ev rots Totxous: 
Ta yap Hep? Tepe Tavras cotiv, dre “yuwoper ya. 

Lee Tuy 
eK ToUTwy. 1 de. yeveois corw [ex? 7a Spow- 

5 Hepav b70 ween kat Geppornros: avvioraras 

yap Kab mhyverat Ta poev. poxpe TO. 5: epud. 
rept dé THs TovTwy diadopas elpyrat mporepov ev 
ETEPOLS, mrota Auta. dyp@ Kal Tupi, ‘Kal rota dura 
dyp@ Kal drnkra mupi. 8a perv obv Tadv _ bAcBav 
Kal T@V ev exdorols Tropwy Svamdvovaa tpody), 

10 Kabdmep € ev Tots cots Kepaystous TO vdwp, yivovrat 

1 Peck : dvarerapevar yulg. he ; 
2'om. SX, Platt: # coni, A -W. oF I is 

® The. term “immutable” is often, used by Aristotle in 
connexion with mathematics, as here.‘ Essence,” lit., “ the 
‘what is it?’,” the essential definition or nature of the ‘thing. 
Cf. quotation from Anal. Post. in preceding note, and Phys. 
198 a 16 f. “in the case of the immutable things, é. 
mathematics, where ultimately all is referred back to tant 
tions, 7d 8a zi (‘ why ’) i is referred back to 76 ri éore (‘ what,’ 
the essence of the thing).”” The’essence is directly perceived, 
not demonstrated. (See previous note.) 

> This is one of the definitions given in Met. 1013 a 4— 
that from which, being present within it, a thing first comes 
into being (d0ev mp@rov yiyveras IL 

© He has repeated it almost continuously. 

218 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vz. 

the essence ? ; but as soon as we begin to deal with 
those things that come into being through a process 
of formation, we find there are several first principles 
—principles, however, of a different kind and not all 
of the same kind. Among them the source whence 
the movement comes? must be reckoned as one, 
and that is why the heart is the first part which all 
blooded animals have, as I said at the beginning °; 
in the other animals it is the counterpart of the 
heart that is formed first. 

_ Beginning at the heart, the blood-vesséls extend 
all over the body. They may be compared to the 
skeleton models which are traced out on the walls of 
buildings,? since the parts are situated around the 
blood-yessels, because they are formed out of them. 

The formation of the uniform parts is effected by the The 
agency of cooling and heat ; some things are “ set ” uniform 

and solidified by the cold and some by the hot. I 
have spoken previously elsewhere ¢ of the difference 
between these, and I have stated what sort of things 
are dissoluble by fluid and by fire, and what sorts are 
not dissoluble by fluid and cannot be melted by fire. 
Resuming then: As the nourishment oozes through 
the blood-vessels and the passages in the several 
parts (just as water does when it stands in unbaked 

4 Cf. H.A.515a35. Hesychius’s and Photius’s definitions 
of xdvaBou describe them as the woodwork around which 
modellers, when they begin their modelling, mould the wax 
or plaster. There is a similar passage in Parts of Animals, 
though without mention of this term (654 b 29); there 
“Aristotle speaks of a ‘‘hard and solid. core or foundation ” 
round which the figure is modelled; though in that case he is 
speaking of the bones. There seems to be no justification 
for interpreting xava8o. as a mere outline or sketch; nor 
would such a meaning fit the passage. Cf. 764 b 31. 

* Meteordlogica, Bk. 1V, chh. 7-10. Of. also 762 a 31. 

219 

parts. 

ARISTOTLE)! i (1 408e 

743 a ' 
cdpkes 7 TO Tavrats avddoyov, bo Tod svxpod 

ovviordpieva, 51d kal Avovrat b7d Trupos. doa dé 
yenpa. Alay t&v dvareAdAdvtwv, odlyny exovTa by- 
poTnTa Kat Deppornra.s Tatra dé puxepeva. e€arpt- 
lovros Tod bypod peta Tot Oeppob yiverar oxAnpa 
‘ 7 \ / ” ‘ Is f 
15 kai yewdn tiv popdyv, olov dvuyes Kal Képara Kal 
e \ & 614 \ , \ EA rey: 
omAal Kai poyxn: 810 paddrrerat prev mropt, THKET aL 
> 
) ovbev, GAN eva trois typois, olov Ta Ria. 
TOV Wav. Ay 
‘Yd 88 Ths evtos Oepuornros Ta. TE vedpa. Kal 
Ta OoTa yiveras, Enpawoperyns THs bypoTnTos. 810 
\ ” 4 > A > ~ < \ ~ / - i 
Kal Gdutd éort Ta Cota bd TOO mupes, Kabarep 
20 KEpapios” olov yap ev Kapiva), omTneva éotly" 70 
THs ev TH yeveoe: Depudryrtos. mfhd 6€ ovTE 6 TL 
ervye Trovel odpka 7) daTody, 086 Smov* Eruxev, ov” 
omote ervyev,® GAAd TO TepuKods Kal ob* méduKe Kal 
Ld , »” \ ‘ La vn ec ‘ ~ 
ote mépuKev. ovTE yap TO Suvdper Ov bd TOD ur 
Thy evépyevav ExovTos KWyTLKOD EoTaL, OUTE TO THV 
25 évépyevav Exov Toujoer eK Tod TuUXdVTOS, WoTrEp 
ovre KiBwrov pn) ex EVAov O TEKTWY TOLNCELEV AY, 
> » , ct > A Foals 
ovT dvev TovTov KiBwros eoTar ex Tov EvAwY. 
‘H 8S€ Oepudrns evuTdpyer ev TH oTeppatiK@ 
TEepitTmpat. TocavTyv Kal TovadTyY €xovoa THY 
Kijow Kal THY evépyevar, don ovpperpos _ els 
Exagrov Tav popiwy. Kal’ doov 5’ ay éMeizry | 
”“ c / ” 
30 7) brepBadAn, 7} xelpov amoreAct 7 dvdarnpov TO 
ywopevov, TapaTAnciws Tots e€w oavveoTtapevors 
1 éo7iv P: om. vulg. 2 Grou Ps dan vulg. 
3 080’ éndre Ervyev P: om. vulg. 408 me 9 vulg. 
220 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v1. 

earthenware), flesh, or its counterpart, is formed : it 
is the cold which “‘ sets” the flesh, and that is why 
fire dissolves it. As the nourishment wells up, the 
excessively earthy stuff in it, which contains but little 
fluidity and heat, becomes cooled while the fluid is 
evaporating together with the hot substance, and is 
formed into parts that are hard and earthy in appear- 
“ance, e.g., nails, horns, hoofs and bills ; hence, these Nails, ete. 
can be softened, but not one of them can be melted, 
by fire; ‘though some, ¢.g., eggshell, can be melted 
es fluids.» we 
The sinews and: bones are formed, as the fluidity sinews and 

solidifies, by the agency of the internal heat; hence °™**- 
bones (like earthenware) cannot be dissolved by fire ; 
they have been baked as it were in an oven by the 
heat present at,their formation. This heat, however, 
to produce flesh, or bone, does not work on some 
casual material in some casual place at some casual 
time; material, place and time must be those 
ordained by Nature : that which is potentially will not 
be brought into being by a motive agent which lacks 
the appropriate actuality; so, equally, that which 
possesses the actuality will not produce the article out 
of any casual material. No more could a carpenter 
_ produce a chest out of anything but wood; and, 
equally, without the carpenter no chest will be pro- 
duced out of the wood. 
| This heat resides in the seminal residue, and: the 
__. movement and the activity which it possesses are in 
amount and character correctly proportioned to suit 
each several part. If they are at all deficient or 
excessive, to that extent they cause the forming pro- 
duct to be inferior or deformed. The same is true 
of things that are “ set” by heat elsewhere than in 

221 

743 a 

743 b 

ARISTOTLE 

dua Tijs epyjoews mpos Tpophs dmohavow 7 7 hia 
adAnv épyaciav. adn’ evrabda. pev nets THY 
Oepyornros OUpLETpiav ets THY Koow TApackerc 
Cope, exel b€ S®wow 7 pvous uy) ToD yevv@vros. 

35 Tots dé avroudarus ywopevols 7) THS wpas atria 

Kino. Kal Bepyorns. 

¢ 

H de Wwvéus orepnots Bepporytds € éorw. xpirae 
S dporépous 7) puous exovar (per Sivapuey | e€ 
dvdyans WaTE TO pev Took TO Sé 708i mroveiv, ev 
fevrTou Tois ywvouevois Eeverd Twos ovpPaivet TO 

\ / ? ~ \ A / \ , 
pev idyew adta@v to dé Oeppaivew, Kat yiveoBar 
TOV joptey €xaorTov, rip pev odpKa, paracny 7H) 
prev &€ dvdyens TOLOUVTWY Tovavrny TH. 8 vera 

5 Twos, TO be vedpov Enpov Kal éAkrov, To 8 dotoby 

Enpov kal Opavoror. To 6€ Seppo. Enpawouerns 
Ths capkos yiveran, Kabdaep emt tots eprpacw v) 
KaAoupevn ypads. od peovov S€ Sia TO eoxaroy 
oupBatver avToo 7 yeveors, aAAa Kat Sidre. ém- 
TrohdLet TO yAiaxpov dud 70 py) Svvacbar eLarpilew. 

10 ev prev obv Tots dMous avypnpov TO _vAtoxpoy (10 

OOTpAKOdEp}La. Kal padacdorpara. Td. eoxard €oTt 
Tov dvainwv Cabwv), év S€ Tots évaipous 70 yAio- 
ypov Aurapwrepov €oTw. Kal TOUTWY doa 1) yewdy 

\ 4 a / > / 4 ~ ¢€ \ 
thy dvow exer Aiav, GOpoileras TO myeA@des bro 
THY TOO Sépuatos oKérnv, ws Tod Sépuaros yr 

15 vowevov ex THs Tovadrns yAucxpoTynTos: exe yap 

/ A / / A lod 
twa yAwoxpoTnta TO Aimapov. mavra dé Tadra, 
/ ” / / a Rene i212 
Kaddmep <eimopev, Aexréov yivecBar rH pev e€& 
> / ~ > > > > 4 > > @ 4 f - 
avayKns TH S odK €€ avdyKys add’ Evexd, Twos. 

‘ Ch. 767 a 17 ff. 
» i.¢., the change required to be effected ; see Introd. § 48, 
Kivyots. © See Introd. § 8. 

222 

- GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vz. 

the-uterus ; ¢.g-, things which we boil to make them 
_ pleasant for food, or for any other practical purpose. 
The only-difference is that in this case the correct ,, 
proportion of heat? to suit the movement? is supplied 
by us, whereas in the other, it is supplied by, the 
nature of t e generating parent. With those animals 
that are formed spontaneously the cause responsible 
is the movement and heat of the climatic conditions. 
Heat and cooling (which is deprivation of heat) are 
both employed by Nature. Each has the faculty, 

: din necessity, of making one thing into this 
and another thing into that ; but in ‘the case of the 
forming of the embryo it is for a purpose that their 
power of heating and cooling is exerted and. that 
each. of the parts is formed, flesh being made soft—as Flesh. 
heating and cooling make. it. such, partly owing to. - 
necessity, partly for a purpose,—sinew solid and elastic, 
bone solid and brittle. Skin is formed as the flesh skin. 
solidifies, just as scum or “ mother ”’ forms on boiled 
liquids. Its formation is due not merely to its being 
on the outside, but also to the fact that glutinous 
substance remains on the surface because it cannot 
evaporate. In blooded animals the glutinous’ sub- 
stance is more fatty than‘in bloodless ones, in which 
it is dry, and on this account the outer parts of the 
latter are testaceous or crustaceous. In those blooded 
animals whose nature is not excessively earthy, the 
fat collects.under the protective covering, the skin, 
which seems to indicate that the skin is formed out 
of this.sort of glutinous substance, since of course 
grease is to some extent glutinous, We are to say, 
then, as already stated, that all these things are 
formed partly as\a result of necessity, partly also not 
of necessity but for a purpose.° 

223 

743 b 

744a 

ARISTOTLE || 1 

Hparov poev oby TO diven Kiros apopilerar Kara 
THY yeveow, 70 be Kedron _mpotovros Tod ‘xpdvov 
20 AapBaver tiv aveEnow ev rots evai}ors. dmavra dé 
Tats Tmeprypagats Stopilerat mporepor, votepov de 
AapBaver Ta. Xpopara Kal Tas padaxornras: ct 
Tas oxAnpornras, aTexv@s Borrep | av bro wypad 
Tijs pvoews Snpwoupyovpeva.” Kat yap of y 
Umoypaibavres Tats ypappats ovTws fon 
25 Tots Xpwopaor TO f@ov. oe 

Aca oev ovv TO THY. apxiVy ev TH capdia. TOV 
aicthicewy elvas Kad Tob Leou mavros avrn yiverat 

mp@rov: dua Se TI beppdryra TV Tabrns, v7) 
TeAcuT@aw: at _preBes avo, TO puxpov ouviornow 
avtiorpopov Th Deppornre TH mept THhv Kapdlav Tov 

30 eyepador, Sud7rep TO mepl Thy Kedadrjy AapBaver 
ovvEexh THY yeveow peta THY Kapdiay, Kat peyeBer 
Trav dw diadhéeper- odds yap Kal bypos e€ 
apxis 6 eyepadros. 

"Exe. 8° amopiay To rept TOUS ogpbadwovs oun 
Batvov trav Cowv. HEyvoTou pev yap e& dpxiis 
gaivovTa. Kal meLlots Kal mAwrots Kal _mTvois, 

35 TeAevraior dé ylvovrat TOV pmoplwy: ev 7@ perago 
yap xpovw ovuminrovew. aitiov, 6’) 6Te TO. TOV 
odbaAuav aiaOnriprov €oTl pevy womep. Kal TO. 
adda aicOyripia," emt mopwv' adr TO pev Tijs adijs 
Kal yevoews evs eoTw 7) c@pa 4 Tod odparos 
Tt Tav Caowv, 4 8S dodpnots Kal 7) aKon mépot 
ovvanrovTes Tmpos TOV aépa Tov Ovpabev, mAnpets 
ovpdvrov mvetuatos, mepaivovres 8é mpos Ta 

* domep... aicOyrypia fort. secludenda ; ; suspic. est Platt. 
pev éeorw 7, pro €ott pev 3 troAAa P pro ta gin, 

224 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vz. 

_ Now the upper portion of the body is the first to be 
marked off in the course of the embryo’s formation; 
the lower portion receives its growth as time goes on. 
(This applies to the blooded animals.) In the early 
stages the parts are all traced out in outline ; later 
on they get their various colours and softnesses and 
hardnesses, for all the world as if a painter were at 
work on them, the painter being Nature. Painters, 
as we know, first of all sketch in® the figure of the 
animal in outline, and after that go on to apply the 
colours. _ 

As the source of the sensations is in the heart, 
the heart is the first part of the whole animal to be 
formed ; and, on account of the heat of the heart, 
and to provide a corrective to it, the cold causes the 
brain to “set,” where the blood-vessels terminate 
above. That is why the regions around the head 
begin to form immediately after the heart and are 
bigger than the other parts, the brain being large 
and fluid from the outset. 

The development of the eyes is something of a 
puzzle to the student. In birds, beasts, and fishes 
alike, the eyes are from the outset very large in 
appearance, yet they are the last of all the parts to 
be completely formed, since they shrink up in the 
meantime.’ The reason is that the sense-organ of 
the eyes is indeed, like the other sense-organs, set 
upon passages ; but whereas the sense-organ of touch 
and of taste is just the animal’s body or some portion 
of the body, and smell and hearing are passages 
full of connate pneuma,° connecting with the outer air 
and terminating at the small blood-vessels around 

2 Cf. note, 740 a 28. > Cf. H.A. 561 a 19 ff. 
© See App. B §§ 26 ff. 
; I 225 

¢ 

Brain. 

Eyes. 

744a 

ARISTOTLE | AS 

prcBia ta mept tov eykédadov reivovta amd THs 
5 Kapdias* 6 8 opbadpos oda pdvov touov EXEL TOV 
aioOnrnpiov. éott 8’ bypov Kat puxpov, Kal ov 
mpoumdpxov €v T) TOT Kabdrep Kal To didAa 
Hopia duvapet, emeiTa evepyeia yeropeva. Sorepoy: 
aA amo Tis wept Tov eyKéedadov bypoTyTos azo- 
10 Kpiverat TO Kafapararov dud Tov mopay ot pai- 
VOVTaL $épovres am adta@v mpos TH pajvuyya TI 
repl TOV eyepahov. tovtov Sé TEKpNpLoV™ -ovTe 
yap daAXo HOpwoy bypov Kal puxpov eoTw ev TH 
Kepadf mapa TOV eyKeparor, TOT Opupa yuxpov 
Kal dypov. e€ avayKns ovy 6 TOTm0s AapBaver 
15 peyebos TO TpO@tov, oupminre. 8 voTEpov. Kat 
yap mrept TOV eyxepahoy ovpPaiver Tov avdtov Tpd- 
mov’ TO mpa@tov bypos Kal mods, amomveovros be 
Kal weTTopévov owparodrat te waAXov Kal ouvp- 
? sf) eys2 t \ \ , my) Vous 
minrer Kal 6 eyKépados [kal Ta odparal Kal TO 
peyefos 76 TOV Oppdtwv. e€€ apyns dé dua pev Tov 
20 eyxepadrov 7) Kehadn peyiorn, dia S€ TO bypov To 
> Ane atte | \ , amt 
ev Tois Oupacw ot ddfadpnot peydAo daivovrat. 
a \ / / \ A ‘ \ 
terevtaion 5€ AapBdvovar tédos Sua TO Kal TOV 
> fs / / > A A / a 
eyxedarov ovviotacba pdrts* oe yap averar THS 
yuypdotyntos Kai THs bypdéTyTos €nl mavTwy wev TOV 
> / 2 + ary = ~ > 4 ‘ Ah 7 
exovTwr,” uddvota 8° emi tav avOpamwv. dia yap 
25 ToOUTO Kal TO Bpéypa Tav ooT@y yiverar TeAev- 
tatov: 70) yap yeyevnuevwy Ovpale tav euBpdwyr 
1 om. S, seclusit Bekker: «ai 7a dupara Platt, om. «ai 70 
peyebos To TOV Opparwr. 
2 rav éexovrwy P: habentibus magnum cerebrum X: om. 
vulg. 

226 

r 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vr. 

the brain which extend thither from the heart, the 
eye, by way of contrast, is the only one of the 
sense-organs which has a special “body ”’ of its 
own.. It is fluid and cold; and, unlike the other 
parts, which are present in their places potentially 
to in with and later on come to be formed im 
actuality, this one is not there at the start,* but it 
is produced by the purest part of the liquid around 
the brain being secreted off through those passages ” 
which are to be observed leading from the eyes to the 
membrane around the brain. A sure sign of this is 
that beside the brain there is no part in the head 
except the eye which is cold and fluid. “Hence it 
is due to necessity that this region gets large at first 
but shrinks later on; because the same happens 
to the brain: at first this is fluid and large, but 
as evaporation and concoction proceed it- becomes 
more solid and shrinks; so does the size of the 
eyes. . From the outset the head is very large, on 
account of the brain, and the eyes, as we see, are 
large on account of the fluid in them. But the 
eyes are the last of all to reach their completion, 
because the brain (on which they depend) does not 
“set ” at all easily ; it is quite late before it ceases 
to be so cold and fluid ; and this is true of all animals 
that have a brain, especially of man. That is why 
the bregma® is the last of the bones to be formed : 
even after the embryos are brought to birth, this 

* Aristotle’s knowledge that the eye is an offshoot from the 
brain, and does not originate in the position which it finally 
oceupies, is indeed remarkable. 

® These are no doubt the optic nerves. 

© Cf. P.A. 653 a 34 and H.A. 491431. This is the bone 

' which finally grows over the space at the top of the skull 

known as the “ anterior fontanelle.”’ 
227 

ARISTOTLE HAWS) 

144 a eo - The ‘ y 
padarov ca7t Tobro 7d daToby Tois mawdtos.* 
airiov. de Tob pada’ ext TOV. apa: tobTo 
ovpBatvew, OTL TOV eynépanor dyporaroy | exovat 
Kal mAciorov tav Cawv, TovTou 8° aitiov ott Kal 

30 T7)V ev TH Kapota beppdryta Kabapwrdryv. Snot 
de TI _edKpaciav 7 Sidvora* Ppovepairaroy yap 
€oTl TOV Cpeoy dvOpuros. dkparh dé Kal Td. 
mra.dla EXPL aroppu THS Kepahis €or dua TO 
Bapos TO Tepe TOV eynepadov. opotws: be Kal 
Tov fopiwy doa Set Kuwelv- } yap dipx7) THs 
KwToews oype Kparet T@v dvenbev Kal TeAev- 

35 Tailor, Gowv 4 Kivnots [1 ouviipranras mpos avriv, 
woTep TOV Koha. To.obrov 6 €oTl pdpiov TO 
BAépapov. émet 8 odfev srovet mepiepyov obde 

/ ¢ tA ~ ¢ #Q>) 97 29\ a 
parny 1 pvors, dijAov ws ov vorepoy : odde mpo- 
TEpov" eora yap TO yeyovos 7H? parny 7) mreptepyov. 

744 b aol? ape avdyen Ta Brépapa SuaxwpileoBad Te 
Kat dvvacba Kuveiv. oye pev obv dia TO mAHOOS 
Tis mepi tov eyKédadov trépews TeAevobrat 7a 
Oupata Tots Ceous, tedevraia dé Sid To opddpa 
Kparovons THS Kwijoews: elvat TO Kuvely Kal TA 

5 oUTws méppw Ths apyfns Kat amebuypeva Tav 
popiwy. dndot dé ta BAedapa TovadTnv ExovTa THY 
dvaw: av yap Kal dtogovoby Bapos yevyrat mepi 

\ \ > Ad ”“ / bd + ~ 
Thy Kepadny uv tmvov % peOnv 7 dAdo Te TaV 
TotovTwy, o0 Svvducba ta BAddapa aipew, ovTw 
Bdpos atrav éexydvTwy piKpov. 
1 +zois maidios P: r&v matdiwv vulg. 
24 P: om. vulg. ® re PS: om. vulg. 

* ebxpacia. For xpaois see Introd. § 40; and ef. P.A. 
673 b 26 and Hippocrates, a. dvairns I. 35. 
» See Introd. §§ 11, 51. 

228 

~ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v1. 

‘bone is still soft in the case of children. The reason 
why this occurs especially in man is that in man 
_the brain is more fluid and greater in volume than 
in any other animal, and the reason of this, in its 
turn, is that the heat in the heart is purest in man. 
The fineness of the blend ¢ in man is shown by his © 
_ possession of intellect : there is no other animal which 

so intelligent. Even children however for a con- 
siderable period lack full control over their heads. 
_ This is due to the weight of the brain, and the same 
may be said of those parts of the body which Irave to 
be moved. It is quite late before the principle of 
-movement gets control over the upper parts; and 
_ its control over those parts (such as the legs) whose 
"movement is not closely connected with it is achieved 
last of all. Another such part is the eyelid. Now, as 
Nature does nothing that is superfluous or pointless, 
_ it is plain that she will not do anything too late or too 
soon, for in that case what was done would be either 
pointless or superfluous. Therefore the separation 
of the eyelids and the ability to move them must 
“coincide in time. Thus the completion of the forma- 
tion of the eyes comes late, because of the large 
“amount of concoction required by the brain, and it 
‘comes last, after all the other parts, because the 
“movement ® must be very strong and powerful in 
Beds to move parts which are so far away from the 
first principle,° and so much subjected to cold. That 
‘such is the nature of the eyelids is shown by the 
fact that even if a very little heaviness affects the 
head through sleep or intoxication or anything of 
that sort, we are unable to raise the eyelids although 
their weight is very slight. 

© Viz., of movement, i.e. the heart. 
229 

10 Ilept prev obv opbahy av elipnrar Tas ywovrat Kal 
bu’ 6 7, Kal dia tiv’ aitiay rehevratay AapBdvovar 
THv Sudplpwow. 

Téav & dAAwv yiverat joptov ‘Exaotoy ek Tis 
Tpopijs, TO pv TYLUTOTO, Kal pereAndéra THS KU- 
pusrarns dpxijs eK THs TeTE [LEVIS Kal Kkabapwrd- 
7™7s Kal TPWTNS TPOPNS, 7a 8 dvarya ata HopLa. Kal 

15 TOUTE evekev €K Tijs Xelpovos Kal TOV SaroAcup- 
patwv Kal TEpiTTMpaTo. woTEp yap olicovdjios 
ayabas, Kat x puous ovdev  dmoBdNew cleoBev € 
av €or Touijoat 7 xXpnorov. ev de rats otKo- 
vopiats Tis ywopevns Tpopis 7 pev Bedriorn TEé- 
TaKToL Tots eAevbépors, a d¢€ xelpwv Kal TO TeE- 

20 pirrepa tadrys (rots) olkérais, Ta O€ Yelptora Kal 
Tots ovvTpepopevous SiSdaor Coots.” Kabdaep obv 
ets Thy avenow o re) Ovpaber Tabra motel vods, obtws 
ev Tots ywopevos avrois Ul vats eK pev THS Kab- 
apwrarns oAns odpKas Kal Trav aAAwv _aianrn- 
picov TO odpara ouviornaw, ex b€, TOV Tepir- 

25 TwpdrTov do7d. Kal vetpa Kal Tpixas, évt 8 Ovuxas 
Kat omAds Kal mdvra 7a Towbra: 510 TeAevrata 
radra AapBdver tiv ovotacw, drav dn ylyvntas 
TepirT apa Tijs picews., 

‘H per obv Tav orev vows &v Th TpPwTH Ov- 
oTdoet “yiverau rev _poptov éx Tijs omepparucts 

30 mepiTTwocws, Kal TOV Coeur avfavowevwv eK THs 

: guouctis Tpodijs AapPdver Hy avenow, e€ HoTeEp 
TO pdpia Ta KUpia, TadTns pévTo. adtis TA dit0- 

1 supplevit Richards. 

2 i.¢., blood. 
> Cf. the regular distinction between “ the better” and 
“* necessity.” * The sense-organ of touch. 

230 

| 

: 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v1. 

. This concludes our discussion about the eyes. We 
have. said how they are formed, and why, and what 
is the reason that they are the last of all the parts to 
be articulated. 

Each of the remaining parts is formed out of the 
nourishment. The most honourable ones, those 
which have a share in the supreme controlling prin- 
ciple, are formed out of the first of the nourishment,” 
which has been concocted and is purest ; the “ neces- 
sary ” parts,” which exist for the sake of those just 
mentioned, are formed out of inferior nourishment, 
out of the leavings and the residues. Like a good 
housekeeper, Nature is not accustomed to throw 
anything away if something useful can be made out 

ofit: In housekeeping the best of the food available . 

is reserved for the freemen; the residue left over 
from this as well as the inferior food goes to the 
servants, and the worst of all goes to the domestic 
animals. Here thenis aninstance of a mind, external 
to them, acting so as to provide for their growth. In 
the same way Nature is at work within the creatures 
themselves that are being formed, and constructs 
flesh * and the bodily parts of the other sense-organs 
out of the purest of the material, whereas out of the 
residues she constructs bones and sinews and hair, 
and also nails and hoofs and all such things, which 
means that they have to wait till Nature has some 
residue to hand, and that is why they are the last 
to be constructed. 

_. The bones, then, are formed during the first stage 
of construction out of the seminal residue, and as the 
animal grows they grow too. Their growth i is derived 
from the natural nourishment, which is the same as 
that which supplies the supreme parts ; only they 

231 

Bones, ete. 

744 b 

745 a 

or 

10 

ARISTOTLE 34a 

Acippara Kal Td. TepiTTwparicd. yiveras yap ev 
mavrt TO. ™p@Tov Kal To Sevtepov ris" Tpopijs 
TO pev Opemrucov To 8 abéyriKov, Spenrucov pev 
O TO elvat TapeXeT at T@ Te OAw Kal Tots proptots, 
avenTuKcov 8é 76 eis péyebos moody rv emiboouw’ 
rept av vorepov Sopiotéov HaMov. Tov adrov be 
Tpomrov Tots darois kal Ta vebpa ouviorarat Kat 
eK TOV avUT@V, EK Tis’ oTepparuchs TEpliTTTEws 
Kal Ths OpentiKfs. ovuxes d€ Kal Tplyes Kal omAal 
Kal KépaTa Kal pvyyn Kal Ta TARKTpa TOV Op- 
vidwy, Kat et TL TOLodTOV ETEpoY €aTL LOPLOV, EK TAS 
ETLKTHTOV TpOPpHs Kal THs avlynTiKHs, WV TE Tapa 
Tob OjAcos emiKTarat Kai [ris |? bUpabev. dua TobTO 
Ta pev cota péxpt twos AapPdver thy avenow: 
€oTt yap Ti maou Tois Cw@ous mépas Tod peyebous, 
610 Kal Tis TOY doTav adv&yjoews. et yap tadr 
elyev av€now del, kat TOv Cawv doa Exer GoTobv 
9 TO avddoyov, nv&dver av Ews €ln- Too yap 
peyebous Opos earl tatra trois Cao. 80 av pev 
obv aitiav odK det AapBavovow _adbénow Aexréov 
TRE, tpixes 5€ Kal Ta ovyyevh ToUTOLs, Ews av 
Lirias Z: Kal THS vulg. 2 seclusi. 

* The functions of “‘ nutritive Soul” (see above, 735 a 17, 
and De anima 415 a 25) are to generate, and to make use of 
nourishment; it is the same Svvayus of the Soul which generates 
and which nourishes (De anima 416 a 19). In the passage 
which there follows, a distinction is made between being 
nourished (rpépecBar) and growing (adédveoBax). At 416 b11, 
Aristotle says that ‘ nourishment” is not identical with 
‘*‘ that which is growth-promoting ’’; thus, in so far as the 
living thing (the creature ‘‘ with Soul in it”) is of a certain 
quantity, the food is “* growth-promoting ”’ (7.¢., increases its 
quantity) ; but in so far as the creature is a particular thing, 
an individual “ being,” the food is ‘* nourishment,” because 

232 

__ ous spines of Selachia (sharks, etc.) (P.A. 654 a 20, 655 a 23). 

st GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vz. 

get merely the leavings and the residues of it. In 
every instance, of course, there is nourishment of 
two grades present: (1) “ nutritive,” that is to say, 
which provides both the whole and the parts with 

_ being ; (2) “ growth-promoting,” that is to say, which 

causes increase of bulk. These will have to be more 
particularly distinguished later on.* The sinews are 

_ constructed in the same way as the bones, and out 
_ of the same materials, viz., the seminal or “‘ nutri- 
_ tive’ residue. As for nails, hair, hoofs, horns, bills, 

cocks’ spurs and any other such part, these are formed 
out of the supplementary or “ growth-promoting ” 
nourishment, this additional nourishment being 

_ obtained from the female, and from outside. On this 
_ account, the bones continue growing only up to a 

certain point, for as all animals have a limit to their 
size, this involves a limit to the growth of the bones. 
If the bones continued growing for ever, then every 
animal which contains any bone or the counterpart 
of bone” would go on growing as long as it lived, 
because the bones set the limit for an animal’s size. 
We shall have to explain later on why the bones 
do not continue growing for ever. Hair and similar 
things, on the other hand, continue growing so long 
it maintains the creature's being. And it is also “* productive 

of generation-’’—not, of course, of the generation of the 
creature which is getting the nourishment, for its “* being ” 

__ is already there, but of another creature similar to it (416 b 15- 
_ 17). It thus appears that the business of “ nutrition” is 

concerned with the maintenance of a liying creature’s being, 
and with the generation of new ones’ being; “ growth-pro- 
motion” is concerned with increasing the bulk of that which 
already has being—and this is precisely the distinction which 
Aristotle employs in the present passage. 

® ¢.g., the os sepiae, the “pen” of calamaries, the cartilagin- 

745 a 

15 

/ 

20 

30 

ARISTOTLE)! 790) 

brdpywow, adfdvovrat, Kat waddAov €v vdoors Kal 
TOV CwWLaTOW YNpaoKovrov Kal POvdvrev Sidi “70 
ActmeaBau TEpiTTWLA. mhetov eAdrrovos ets “7a 
KUpua Samavepevov dua TO yapas Kal Tas vdoous, 
€7rel x oray Smorelrn Kal TobTo Sud Thy ruta, 
Kal at TpIXEs b7roAcizovaw. 7a & dora Tobvavrloy” 
oupdbiver yep TO odpare Kat Tots HEpeow. ao- 
Sdvovrau 3 at TpIXES Kat TeOvedirwv, ov (pevrou 
ylwovtal y’ €€ b drapx7s. beat 
Hepi 5 dddvrwn a drrophaevey av TIS. cial yap Thy 
fev pvow TY avray €xovrTes Tots dorots, Kai ye 
vovTat €K TAY ooTaV, OvUxES. dé Kat tpixes Kat 
KépaTa Kal Ta ToLadTa €K ToD Sepyaros, ‘8d..Kad 
ovpperaBadrovor TO Sepyare Tas xpoas* AevKd. TE 
yap kai péAava yivovras Kal TavTodaTa KaTa. THY 
ToD Sépyaros Xpoav, ot 8° oddvres obbev: ex yap 
Tav doTtév eiow, doa TaV Codbwv € exet ‘dddvTas Kal 

5 00Tad. av&dvovrar dé dia Biou pevot Ttav aAAwv 

doTa@v> totro dé dijAov em TOV Tapaxduvdvreay 
dddvTwr. Thy adyy THY arAjAwv. aitiov dé THs 
avéijoews, ws pev everd Tov, dua TO Epyov: TaXD 
yap av KatetpiBovto pr) ywopevns Twos émuppv- 
sews, eel Kal vov éviois ynpacKover, Tots Bpw- 
TuKots fev 22) Heyddovs &’ éyovat, Kararpipovrat 
maprrav: mAeiove yap Ady Kafoupodvras Tis av 
Ejoews. 810 Kal todro <b pepnydvynrar mpos To 

* In the case of rabbits, etc., it may happen that a tooth 
in the upper jaw and one in the lower grow outwards and 
thus continue growing indefinitely, so that foals the animal 
is unable to eat at all. 

234 

lle 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vt. 

as they are there at all, and they grow more during 
diseases, and when old age advances, and when the 
body is wasting. This is because old age and diseases 
mean that less (nourishment) is expended on the 
supreme parts of the body and therefore more residue 
is left over; though when even this begins to fail 
through age, the hair follows suit. With the bones, 
the reverse occurs: they waste away along with the 
body and its parts. Hair actually continues to grow 
after life is extinct, though it will not begin growing 
where it does not already exist. 

Teeth may present a puzzle. They possess. the Teeth. 

same nature as the bones and are formed out of the 
bones ; nails, hair, horns and the like, however, are 
formed out of the skin, and that is why they change 
their colour along with the skin ; they turn white and 
black and all shades according to the colour of the 
skin. The teeth do none of this, because they are 
formed out of the bones (this applies of course only 
to such animals as have both teeth and bones). They 
are unique among bones in that they continue grow- 
ing all through life, as is clear in the case of teeth 
which take an oblique direction and fail to come 
into contact with each other. The reason for their 
growth, the purpose for the sake of which they grow, is 
to discharge their special function: they would soon 
be worn down unless the loss were made good in some 
way,” since even as it is, in some aged animals which 
eat a great deal but have small teeth, they are quite 
worn away, because their growth is not proportionate 
to their loss. And so here too Nature has produced 

° L. & S. translate “unless there were Some means of 
saving them’; but Scot translates si non crescerent con- 
sumerentur cito nist esset materia ex qua crescunt. 

235 

745 a 

745 b 

35 

co 

10 

15 

ARISTOTLE 

ovpBaivov 7 poor: cuvdyet yap els TO yipas Kal 
7H tehevray THY drrdAeupw T&v dddvrwv. et 5° 
HV pupieTns 6 Bios “7 xidverijs, mrappeyebers 7° av 
dee yivecOau TOUS ae apxijs Kat dvecbar mods 
Kal yap ei ouvexh THV avénow elyov, Ouws av 
axpyaror Acawdpevor mpos TIv epyaciav hoav. od 
prev ov evexa AapPBdvovor tHv av—now, <ipyrat: 
ovpPaiver dé pnde tiv adriv exew dvow Tots 
aMois dorots Tos dddvras: Ta bev yap ev TH 
mparn ovoTdoe. yiverar TaVvTa Kal oddev vorepov, 
o 8 odovres dorEpoy. 510 Kal mddw Sdvavrae 
dpvecbar EKTEDOVTES” darrovrat yap, aA’ ov oup- 
mepvKact Tois GoTots. eK pEevToL THS TpodHs THs 
> \ >. a / / ‘ \ > \ 
eis TA OOTA SiadiwWoperyns yiwovTar, Sid THY adTHV* 
” / a; / LA > a ” ww 
éxovar dow, Kai Tore Grav exeiva Exn On TOV 
> \ \ rie oe A \ > + zat ‘Pia 
apiOuov Tov aitav. ta pev odv adda Ca Exovra 
yiverat OddvTas Kal 7d avdAoyov Tots ddofoty, eav 
py Te ylyvynTra Tapa pvow, dia TO atroAvecOan THs 
, , x, Jo r a ¢ 99 
yevécews TeTEAcopeva TOD avOpwrov paddrov: 6 5 
avOpwros, av un Te ovpP mapa dvow, ovK exwr. 
du qv 8 airiay ot pev yivovrar TOv dddvTwy Kal 
exmimtovow, ot 8 odk éexmimtrovaw, boTEepov Ae- 
xOnoerar. : 
Avért 8 ek TEpLTTeLLaTOS €or TA ToLadra TOY 
propiwy, dua ToT dvOpwros yuAdTaTdv Te Kata TO 
cGpa tav lawv mdvrwy eoti Kal dvuxas. eAayxi- 
otous éxes Ws Kara péyeOos: eAdyioTov yap, Exet 

1 airiv Bekker, per typothetae errorem. 

@ Bk. V, ch. 8. > i.e. hair, nails, ete. 
236 

J 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vz. 

an excellent device to suit the case, in making the 
failure of the teeth coincide with the time of old age 
and the close of life. If life went on for 10,000 or 
even 1000 years, the teeth would have had to be quite 
enormous to begin with, and they would have had to 
grow afresh many times over ; not even continuous 
growth would have sufficed to prevent them being 
ground down and becoming useless for their work. 
We have now described the purpose for the sake of 
which the teeth grow. And yet as a matter of fact 
the teeth do not possess the same nature as the rest 
of the bones, because the bones, without exception, 
are all formed during the first stage of the embryo’s 
construction, whereas the teeth are formed later; 
and that, too, is why a fresh set of teeth is able to 
grow after the old ones have fallen out: although 
they are in touch with the bones, they are not all of 
a piece with them. Still, they are formed out of the 
nourishment which is distributed to the bones (which 
is why they possess the same nature), and at a time 
when the bones have already attained their full 
complement. All the animals except man already 
have their teeth (or the counterpart of teeth) when 
they are born—unless it be that something unnatural 
occurs—because when they are released from their 
process of formation they are more fully perfected 
than man ; man however when born has no teeth— 
unless something unnatural occurs. We shall explain 
later on* why some of the teeth are formed and fall 
out and why some do not fall out. 

The reason why man’s body is more naked than 
that of any single one of the other animals, and why 
he has the smallest nails in proportion to his size, is 
this. Parts of this sort ° are made of residue ; now 

237 

‘ARISTOTLE? fy a} 

745 b - be ” \ , x 
TepitTwpa yeddes, Cott S€ mepirTwpa pev TO 

20 dmenrov, to 5€ yenpov ev Tois owpac. mavTwY 

, “+ isle Fotes 
dmentorarov. 
Ilds pev obv ExaGTOV ovviorarat TOV Hoptwy, 
eipnTat, Kal re THS YEVvETEWS alriov. 

Vil "Eyer S€ tiv ad&gow 7a Cworoxovpeva tov 
euBptwv, wamep eAexOn TpoTepov, dua THs. rob 
oudhadod Tpoogucews. emel yap éveotw ev Tots 

25 Cwous Kad a) Openrurt) dvvapus THS puxiis, adinow 
edOds olov pilav Tov oudadocv «is. THY dorépay, 
€oTt dé 6 opdadds ev Keddder ddréeBes, Tots mev 
pretloot Aeious, ofov Bot Kat tots TovovTois, Tots 
dé pécors dvo, pia de Tots eoxdrous. Sud de tovrov 
AapBaver Thy Ttpodry aiparucny, at yap borépae 

30 7épara preBav mohéiv ciow. Ta pev ovv | 
duposdovra mara, Kal TOV dppwddvrer owv 7 
borépa p) piav $AcBa. peyaAnv ever Siaretvovoay 
GAN avti pds muKvas moAAds, tadta ev tats 
dorepais exet Tas Kadoupevas KorvAnddvas, mpos 
ds' 6 opupards ovvaTret Kal Tpoorre ukev" aTroTe- 
Tayrau yap ai drAcBes at dud TOO dpparod évbev 
kal évOev Kal oxilovra mavTn KaTa THY doTEpav: 7 
d€ mepaivovor, TavTn ylyvovtar at KotvAnddves,” 
TO pev mepipepes Exovoa® mpos THY boTEpav, TO 

35 5€ KotAov mpos TO €uBpvov. perakd dé Tis toTépas 
746a Kat Tod euBptov ro xdpiov Kal of bpueves cioiv. at 
1 ds Platt, OP* : aP. 

2 mpos as 6 Gupadrds . . . ylyvovrat ai KorvAndoves POY*E: 
om. vulg. éxyovoa Z et corr. P: éexovoas vulg. 

@ See 740 a 24 ff. 
» Not quite the same as the modern use of the term. 
Aristotle uses it to mean the pits in the modified wall of the 

238 

Ta 

) GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. v1.-vit. 

it is unconcocted substance which constitutes residue, 
and the most unconcocted substance in animals’ 
bodies is the earthy substance, and man has a smaller 
amount of earthy residue than the other animals. 
ateare now described how each of the parts takes 
shape, and what is the cause of their formation. | _ 
In viviparous animals, as stated earlier,*the embryo VII __ 
_. obtains its growth through the umbilical attachment. © Nutr 
_ Since the nutritive faculty of the Soul, as well as the embryo. 
others, is present in animals, it immediately sends off 
the umbilicus, like a root, to the uterus. The umbili- 
eus ‘consists of \blood-vessels in a sheath. In the 
larger animals, such as the ox and the like, it contains | 
numerous blood-vessels, in medium-sized animals, 
two, and in the smallest, one. Through this the 
embryo gets its nourishment, z.e., blood; the uterus 
being the terminus of many blood-vessels. The 
cotyledons ° (as they are called) are present in the 
uterus (a) of al] those animals which have no front 
teeth in the upper jaw, and (6) of those which have 
teeth in both jaws and also have a cluster of blood- 
vessels running right through the uterus instead of a 
single large one. The umbilicus is connected up to 
these’ cotyledons and firmly attached to them ; for 
the blood-vessels which pass through the umbilicus 
extend in both directions and branch out all over the 
uterus, and it is at their terminal points that the coty- 
ledons are formed. Their convex side is towards the 
uterus, their hollow side towards the embryo. Be- 
_ tween the uterus and the embryo are the chorion 
and the membranes. As the embryo grows and 

uterus into which the villi of the outer membrane of the 
embryo fit. For the meaning attached to the term by 
_ Diocles, see Wellmann, reference in note on 746 a 19 below. 

239 

ARISTOTLE 
746 a : > A 
dé Korudn doves av&avopevov Kal TeAcoupévov Tob 
eu.Bpvov yivovrar éAdrrovs, Ka TéAos adavilovrat 
TeAewbévros. els To0TO yap mpoexriferar Tots 
euBpvors a) priors Thy atparucny Tpopiyy Ths baré- 
pas Bomrep els _Hacrous, Kal ua TO dbpoile- 
ofa Kara’ HLucpov ex ToMAdv olov e€dvOnwa Kal 
preypacta yiverau TO capa. TO THS KoTvAnddvos. 
ews pev av odv EAatTov 7 TO euBpvov, ov Surdprevor 
moAAnv AapPdvew Tpopiy, d7jAat eiou Kal neiloves, 
avéndevros d¢ ouprinrovaw. 
a de TOAAG TAV KoAoBav Cee Kal BPA I 
10 odK éyet KoTvAnddvas* €v rais dotépas, GAN 6 
oudardos cis drA€Ba reiver piav, adryn dé Téraras dud. 
THs tborépas €xyovoa péyeOos. emet S€ Ta pev 
poovoréka ta dé modAuTdKa T&v TowovTwv €oTi 
Caiwv, Kai ra TrAciw TOv eBpdwy Tov abrov Exe 
Tpotov TH evi. Set 5€ Tadra Oewpety Ex Te TOV 
15 Tapaderypdrov TOV ev Tats avatopats Kal av év 
Tats foropiats YEYpappevoov. meptKace yap Ta 
laa. éx Tob Ouparod, 6 68 opdadros € ex THs prcBos, 
edhetfs _addnhors, worrepavel Tap” oyeTOV TIV 
dréBa péovoav: epi dé Exaorov Tov euPptwv ot 
 duéves Kal TO yopedv eorw. 
Ot dé Aéyovtes tpéfecOar Ta matdia ev ais 
20 dorépats Sua TOD capKididv tr BddAAEW odK dpO@s 

or 

1 kata P: Kat xara vulg. 
2 xorvAnSdévas P: xorvAnddva vulg. 

* Here seems to mean “ hornless.” 
> Aétius ascribes a similar theory to Democritus and 
Epicurus (Aét. 5. 16; see Diels, Vorsokr.6 68 A 144); 
Censorinus (De die natali 6. 3; Diels 38 A 17) to Diogenes 
and Hippocrates. Cf. Hippocrates, aw. oapkav 6 (viii. 592 

240 

—————-- 

— a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vi. 

approaches its completion the cotyledons become 
smaller, and finally. when it is completed they dis- 
appear. Nature lays in a store of the blood-like 
nourishment for the embryos in this part of the 
uterus, as it were into breasts, and the body of 
the cotyledon becomes as it were an eruption or 
an inflammation owing to the fact that the numerous: 
cotyledons gradually get compacted together. While 
the embryo is fairly small, and unable to take much 
nourishment, they are large and plainly visible, but 
when it has grown they shrink up. - 

The great majority of the “ stunted’? animals, 
and of those that have front teeth in both jaws, have 
no cotyledons in their uterus, but the umbilicus 
extends to meet a single blood-vessel, which is a large 
one and extends throughout the uterus. Some of 
these animals produce one at a birth, others several ; 
but what occurs when there is only one embryo 
occurs also when-there are more. All this should be 
studied with the help of the. illustrative diagrams 
given in the Dissections and Researches. The embryos 
are attached each to its umbilicus, and the umbilicus 
is attached to the blood-vessel ; they are arranged 
one after the other along the stream of the blood- 
vessel as it might be along a runnel in the garden ; 
and there are membranes and a chorion around each 
embryo. 

Those people ® who say that children are nourished 
in the uterus by means of sucking a bit of flesh are 

Littré). The view that the embryo sucked the “ cotyledons” 
was held by Diocles of Carystus (Wellmann, Fragmentsamm- 
lung der sikelischen Arzte, Diocles fr. 27, 10 ff.); and accord- 
ing to Jaeger (Diokles von Karystos, 166), Aristotle’s detailed 
treatment of the subject of cotyledons here is due to the fact 
that Diocles was associated with him in the Lyceum. 

241 

ARISTOTLE) 114090 
746 a / TS A ~ »* VA f A 
Aéyovow: eri te yap 7t&v dAwv Caw tadrov 
ovveBawer av, viv 8 od daiverat (Dewpijoar yap 
TobTO pdd.vov Sud Tov avaropiv)- Kal mept a7ravTo 
Ta eBpva Kal Ta TTHVA Kal 7a mura kal Ta 
TOV mel@v opotins Aerrot Tepiexovow bpeves Xo- 
25 pilovres a a8. Te THs dorépas Kal TOV eyywopevav 
dypav, €v ols ovr adrois eveore Tovobrov. over, 
ovte dud TOUT OW ovdevos evdexerau mrovetoBan THY 
amo\avew: Ta 8 @moroKovpeva TavTa OTe Aap 
Bave my avénow xwpiolévta THs heel so, 
avEpov. 
Diverae be 6 ovvdvacpes Tots Leaks Kare. & didow 
30 pev tois Spoyevéow, od pay GAAd Kab Tots jev 
ovveyyus? TV pow éxyovow, ovK ddvaddpors be 
TO eter, eav Ta TE peyeln TapamAjova 7 Kat ot 
xpovor ico Mow THs Kuyocews. ondvia peev oby 
yiverat Ta. Toadra emi TOV aMwv, yiverat 5é Kat 
emi Kuv@v Kat dAwirEeKav kal AdKwv (Kat Odwv)*: 
35 KaL OL “Tv8xot de Kives ex Onpiov Twos Kuva@dovs 
746 b YervavT at Kal Kuvos.. Kal emt TOV opvibay be 7 TOV 
OXEVTUCY @rTat ToUTO ovpBaivoy, olov emi TEP 
Succov Kat dAexropidy: Kal. TOV yapupevxcav ot 
igépakes Soxobow ot Suadeportes T@ cde piyvu- 
G0a mpos aAAjAous: Kal én Nab Se TWwV 
5 opvewy exer TOV adTov TpdTov. emt de Tav Padar- 
tiwy ovfev a€idrAoyov éwparar, doKodat dé panels 
- 1 7eP: om. vulg. 2 auveyyus SZ* : eyyis ve 
3. Bif.; vids p. 568. 

® Of. H.A. 607 a 4 ff. “‘ they say too that the ‘ Indian dog’ 
is the offspring of a tiger and a bitch ; not the first cross, 
but the offspring at the third generation.” There seems to 

242 

Ee 

ee 

. GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vu. 

mistaken. If this were true, the same would occur 

in the other animals, but it is not found to do so, as 

_ can be easily observed by means of dissections. Also, 

all embryos alike, whether they be of animals that 

fly or swim or walk, have round them fine membranes 

_ which separate them from the uterus and from the 

_ fluids which are formed there ; and there is nothing 

of the sort in these membranes nor can the embryos 

get the benefit of anything whatever through them. 

_ As for embryos that are produced by means of eggs, 

it is of course obvious that in all cases their growth 

takes place outside the uterus, after they have been 
separated from it. 

The partners in copulation are naturally and ordi- Hybrids, 
narily, animals of the same kind; ‘but beside that, 
animals that are closely allied in their nature, and are 
not very different in species, copulate, if they are 
comparable in size and if their periods of gestation 
are equal in length. Although such crossing is in- , 
frequent among the majority of animals, it occurs 
among dogs, foxes, wolves (and jackals) ; the Indian 
dog * also.is produced from the union of a dog with 
some wild doglike beast. It has also been observed 
to occur among those birds that are salacious, e.g., 
partridges and common fowls. A case among’ the 
crook-taloned birds is that of the hawks, different 
species of which copulate, as it appears; and the 
same occurs among certain other birds. We have 
no trustworthy observation of its occurrence among 

_ sea-animals; but there is a strong suspicion that 
_ the rhinobates as it is called is produced by the copu- 

_ be no general agreement as to what this animal was; see 
Platt’s note, C.Q. III (1909), 241 ff. Cf. too the ** Laconian 
hound,” 738 b 31. 

243 

746 b 

ARISTOTLE age 

ot pwoBdrar Kadovpevor yiveoBar ex pins Kal 
Barou ovvdvalopevwy. éyeraur Se Kat TO. rept 
THs  ABdns Trapouralopevor, as del Te THs 
AcBins tTpepovens Kawov, bia TO piyvvobar ‘Kal 

10 7a 7) onda. aAdAnjAots Acx Piva TovTo- dua. yap 
TH omdvu Tou vdaTos dmavravra TavTa 7mpos 
oXtyous TOmoUS Tovs €yovTas vdpaTa piyruabat 
Kal TO pa) Opoyer?. 

Ta ev obv dAAa Tov ex Tovadrns pikews ywo- 
pevey ovvdvalopeva, paiverar T7daAuy ddArjAows Kat 
peyvi eva. Kat duvdpeva TO TE OjAv Kat 70. dippev 

15 yea, ot 8° dpeis dyovot pOvou Tov TOLOUTWY" OUTE 
yap €€ aAAj ACY ovr addAous peyvopevou yevv@ow. 
éort de ro 7 poBAnpa kaborov pe, dia riy’ aitiay 
d-yovov 7 dppev 7 OFAV € eorw: eiol yap Kat yovaires 
Kal avdpes ayovor, Kal Tav aGAkwv Cobwy ev Tots 
yéveow éxdorots, olov ev immo Kal mpoBarors. 

20 ddd. TOTO 70 yévos oXov dyovev €oTt, TO TOV 
7pLvovenv. ta 8 airia THs. dyovias emt pev TOV 
adAwy mAciw oupBaiver Kal yap eK YEveTys, drav 
mmpwbaoar TOUS Tomous TOUS TpOs Thy pl€w ypyai- 
povs, dyovor ylvovrat Kal yovatxes Kat _dvopes, 
dare Tas pev 7) 7)Bav Tovs d€ 41) yeverdy, aan’ 

25 edvovxias SuareAciv ovTas* Tots de mpoiovons THS 
AAkias Tadrov ovpBaiver mdoxew, ore pev bu 
edtpodiav TOY cwyudtwv (Tails per yap morépats 

* The batos is a flat-fish (P.A. 695 b 27, 696 a 26), called 
by Thompson (translation of H.A. 566 a 97 ) the ‘‘ skate,” by 
Platt, a‘“‘ray.” The rhine is called by Thompson the “ angel- 
fish * (note on H.A. 540 b 11), by Platt, a * shark. = ae 
H.A. 566 a 27 ff. Aristotle again refers to the “rhinobates as 
a cross between these two fishes, and says that it has the head 
and foreparts of the bates and the hindparts of the rhine. 

244 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vu. 

lation of the rhine and the batos.* Also, the origin 
of the proverb about Libya, to the effect that 
* Libya is always bringing forth something new,” ? 
is said to be that there animals of different species 
unite, since owing to the fact that as there is very 
little water they all meet together at the few places 
where springs are to be found, and so animals of 

_ different species unite. 

It is known that with one exception all the animals 

_ which are produced as a result of such unions copulate 

with each other and unite in their turn and are able 
to produce young of both sexes. Mules are the one 
exception. They are sterile and do nat generate 
either by union with each other or with other animals. 
It is, of course, a-general problem why any particular 

_male or female is sterile : there are men and women 
_ who are sterile, and there are instances in the several 

kinds of animals, e.g., horses and sheep. But with the 
mules we have a whole race which is sterile. Leaving 

_ this exception for the moment : elsewhere the causes 
_ of sterility are numerous. (a) Men and women alike 

are sterile from birth if they are deformed in the 
regions employed for copulation ; as a result, the 
men do not grow a beard but remain as eunuchs, | 
while the women do not reach puberty ; (6) others 

become sterile as they advance in age, sometimes 

_ (i) because they have put on too much flesh : in men 

_ Platt thinks the rhinobates is the angel-fish; Thompson 

offers the opinion that it is “‘ probably the modern genus 
Rhinobatus ~ ; Platt says ** it certainly did not belong to the 

_ modern genus of that name.” 

® For this proverb: and its explanation, cf. the similar 
passage H.A. 606 b 19 ff. Platt suggests that a mutilated 
passage in Hippocrates, 7. dépwv vdarwy tomwv 12 fin., con- 

_ tained a statement on this subject. 
245 . 

746 b 

747 a 

ARISTOTLE)! 1/11) 

ywomevais Tots 8° eVEKTUKWTEpOLS els TO o@pa 
KaravadioKera TO TEpiTTwWUA TO omepparicdv, Kat 
Tats jev ov yiverat Karapived, tois dé your), ore 

30 5€ Sa vdcor ot pev dypov Kal evypov mpotevrat, 

tats dé yovady at xabdpoes padrar Kat aAipets 
voonparuccy TEepiTTwOmaTO Toots Se Kal TroA- 
Aais Kal dud Tmpopara T00TO oupBaiver TO mdBos 
mepl. TA [ope Kal Tovs TOTOUS, TOUS rept Ty 
opudAtay XPNSYLOVS. yweras d€ Ta ev lara Tad? 
dviara TOV TOLOUTM”, pddvore. (Be StareAodow 

35 dyova. (ray Kara THY Tparny ovoTaow ‘Tovavra. 

yevopeva* yivovTas yap yuvaies Te appevetrot Kat 
avdpes OnAvKot, Ka Tats prev ov: yiverau Ta KaTa- 
pyvia, tots d€ 70 omépya A|emrov Kal puxpov. 
did7rep edaAdyars Bacavilerat Tais metpats 78 ye 
TOV dvdpav, et dyovov, ey TQ Boat Tayv yap 

5 Sayetrar 70 Nerrov Kal buxpov enurroAjs, TO “be 

yovuLov eis BuBov xeoper- Beppo bev yap’ TO mre~ 
TE [L[LEVOV €oTl, mememtat b€ TO OVVEOTHIOS | Kal 
TAXOS EXOV. Tas de yuvatkas Bacavilovar 7 Tots Te 
mpooberors, eav SuKva@vrar at dopa Tpos TO 
mvedpa TO Ovpale KaTwhev dvw, Kai Tois €yxpi- 

10 ctas «is Todvs ofadyods xpwHpacw, av xpwyari- 

{wou To ev TO oTopart mruehov. Taira yap od 
ovpBatvovra dno TO c@pa Tovs TOpous be dv 
dmoxpiverau TO TepirTwn[.a. ouyKexupevous exew 
Kal ovpmepuKotas. 6 TE yap Tept Tovs dd0adpods 
Tomo0s TOV TEpt THY KEehadny oTEeppaTiKwTaTOS 

1 sa supplevi: post ovoracw P. 

* And therefore might be expected to rise. 
246 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vu. 

who are too well fed and in women who are too fat 
the seminal residue is used up for. the benefit of the 
bodily system, so that no semen is formed in the men 
and no menstrual discharge in the women; some- 
times (ii) because of disease ; the semen which the 
men emit is fluid and cold, and the discharges of 
the women are poor and full of morbid residues. But 
in very many cases, in both sexes, this drawback is 
due to deformities in the parts and regions employed 
for intercourse. Some of these deformities are cur- 
‘able, some are not ; those, however, who have become 
deformed during the original constitution ‘of the 
embryo, have a special tendency to remain infertile 
throughout; thus, masculine-looking» women. are 
produced in whom-the menstrual discharges do not 
oecur, and effeminate. men whose semen is thin and 
cold, On this account the water-test is quite a fair 
one for infertility in the male semen, because the 
thin, cold semen quickly diffuses itself on the surface, 
whereas the fertile semen sinks to the bottom ; for 
though it is true that a substance which has been 
concocted is hot,* yet that which has been set and 
compacted and possesses’ thickness » has certainly 
undergone conéoction.’ Women are tested (a) by 
means of pessaries ? the test is whether the scent of 
the pessary penetrates upwards from below to the 
breath which is exhaled from the mouth ; (6) by 
means of colours rubbed on to the eyes, the test being 
whether they colour the saliva. If the required 
result is not forthcoming, it is proved that the passages 
of the body through which the residue is secreted 
have got obstructed and have closed up, for of all the 
regions in the head the eyes are the most seminal, 

> As is shown by-its sinking. Cf. 765 b 2. 
247 

747 a 

VII 

747 b 

ARISTOTLE — 45a) 

15 €orw. Sndot 9° ev’ tais opudtaus peracynparils- 
flevos emvdijAws povos, Kal Tots xpwpevors mActo- 
ow ddpodiatots evdiddacr Ta oppara pavep@s. 
aituov 6° 6tt % THs ‘yovns puous opotws exer TH 
Tob eyxedddov: darwdns yap eorw a) BAN abrijs, 
7 .0€ Depporns eTUKTNTOS. Kal at oTrepparuKat 

20 Kabdpoes a amo TOO brolwpares elow, 1) yap ap 
THS. picews evredley, aore Suxvetobar Tos Tov 
Duspaxa Tas KUTELS and tav dpbpwr: al 8 ek 
Too Fespaxos dcpal mootow aicbnow Sid THs 
dvamvoris. 

"Ev pev ovv Tots dvOpeirrous Kal Tots - dMos 
yéveow, WomTep elpnTat mpdTEpov, KATA pEepos 7 

25 TotavTn ovpPaiver mipwo, TO dé TOV Furovev 
yévos oAov dyovdv €oTw. rept S€ THS alrias, ws 
jeev Aéyovow "EprredoKAfs Kat Anpoxptros, Aéywv 
6 pep ov oagas, Anpoxpitos de yropipas LaMov, 
ov Kahas elpyKacw. Aéyouor yep emi mévrey 
opoiws TH. amddeEw THY Tropa. Thy ouyyéeverav 

30 ovvdvalopever. AnyoKputos pe yap pyr. bu 
epbapbat Tovs mOpous” TOV TpLoveny ev Tats bore 
pas dud TO pe) EK ovyyev@v yiveoBat THY cpxny 
av foun. oupBaiver 8 d° ef? érépwv Sou TOTO 
pev drrdpyxew, yevvay dé pndev rrov: Kairoe xpHy, 
eiep aittov Tobr Hv, ayova Kal TaA\’ <ivae Ta 
puyvifeva tov tpdmov tobrov.  "KumedoKAjs 8 

35 aitvGrat TO plypa TO Tv oTeppatwv yiveobar 
muKvov €K pLadaKhs Tis yovns ovens Exarépas: 
cuvappLoTrew yap Ta KotAa Tots mruKvots GAAyAwY, 

1 & P: & per vulg. 2 amdpous YZ. 

«Cf. Plato, Timaeus 91 a, B 
248 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vi.—vu. 

as is proved by the fact that this is the only region 
_ which unmistakably changes its appearance during 
sexual intercourse, and those who overfrequently 
indulge in it have noticeably sunken eyes. The 
reason is that the nature of the semen is similar to 
that of the brain*; its matter is watery whereas 
its heat is a mere supplementary acquisition.? Also 
the seminal discharges come from the diaphragm, 
because the first principle of the natural organism is 
there,° so that the movements initiated in the genital 
organs penetrate to the chest, and the scents from 
the chest become perceptible through the breathing. 
As I said earlier, this particular deformity occurs Mules. 
in man and in the other kinds of animals to some 
extent, but with mules it is the whole race that is VIII 
infertile. What Empedocles has to say about the 
_ reason for this is obscure ; Democritus is more intel- 
ligible ; but they are both wrong. They give one 
omnibus explanation, covering all cases of copulation 
between animals of different kinds. Democritus ¢ 
says that in mules the genital passages are destroyed 
in the uterus, because the formation of these animals 
has its origin in parents of different species. But we 
find this same situation with other animals, and 
yet they generate notwithstanding; whereas, if 
_ Democritus’s explanation was right, all other animals 
which unite in this way ought to be infertile too. 
_ The cause alleged by Empedocles is this: He says ¢ 
the mixture of the seeds becomes dense as a result of the 
_ tivo component portions of semen being both soft ; because, 
the hollows of one fit into the densities of the other, and in 
> See Introd. § 69. © See 719 a 14. 

# See Diels, Vorsokr= 68 A 151. 
© Diels, Vorsokr.* 31 B92; cf. 91; and 31 A 82. 

249 

747 b 

5 

10 

20 

ARISTOTLE ©) aPC a RG © 

ex 5€ Tv ToLovTwv yivecBar €k padakdy oxAnpor, 
dorep TO Kartirépw puybévta tov yadkov, Aéywv 
our él Tob yaAKob Kal Tod KaTTiTEpov THY aitiav 
> a ” ST fae a , 0, Pug siass 
opbds (eipnrar 8° ev rdis mpoBAjpact Tepi avdTa@yv) 
> / / \ 
ov? dAws ek yrwpiwy Tovovpevos Tas apxds. Ta 
Cal ‘ ~ 
yap KotAa Kal Ta oTEped apdTrovTa aAAjAoLs TOs 
mrovet THY plEw olov olvov Kal bdaros; Tobro yap 
brép has eort To Acydpevov: THs yap det AaPetv 
a A lol S34) ae rEES 
Ta KotAa Tod olvov Kal Tov vdaTos, Alay éoTL Tapa 
\ ” ” Sl \ , e243} 
viv aicbnow. er 8. ered) ovpBaive. Kat e€ 
a / a \ > ww + \ > 
inmwv yiveoOar immov Kal €&€ dvwy. dvov Kal e€ 
immov Kat Ovov hylovov, apdotépws appevos Kal 
OnAeos Strorepovoty évTos, bia Ti eK pev ToUTwY 
: , 
ylveTau TUKVOY OUTWS WoT” dyovoy elvat TO yevo- 
pevov, ek 98 Ummov OnjAcos Kal appevos 7 dvov 
Ojrcos Kal dppevos ov yiver a dyovov;, KaUTOL 
padakov Kal TO TOD \appevos Ummou €oTl, Kal TO 
~ / / \ \ c a a ¢ 
tod OxA€eos, piyvurar 5€ Kal 6 OfAvs tmmos Kal 6 
appnv TO ov, Kal TO Appeve Kal TO OnjAet. Kal 
51a. TOOTO yivovra dyova e€ dudorépw, ws dyoiv, 
ore €€ dyipoty €v TL yiveTau CrUKvOP),: pahaxay 
évTwy TaV oTepuatwv. ede. obv Kal TO €€ immou 
dppevos Kai OyAcos ywopevov. ei ev yap Odtepov 
epiyvuTo povov, eviv av A€yew ote Odrepov aitiov 
A ~ lo ~ a > 
TOO jn) yevvav avopovov dv* TH TOD dvou yoy: viv d 
olatep ovon ekeivn pilyvuTat, TovavTH Kal TH TOO 
1 zuxvev supplevi (zuxvev ze pro &v re Platt): d7u. . . omep- 
pare om. x. 

° dvdpovov év Platt (non assimilatur =X): dpoov yulg.: 
dpovov dv P (yervay 7tovov coniecerunt A.-W.). 

250 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vin. 

such circumstances two softs give rise to one hard, just as 
bronze mixed nith tin does. In the first place, he has 
got the reason wrong in the case of bronze and tin 
(see what I have written about this in the Problems), 
and further, to put the objection generally, the 
ples from which he starts his argument are not 
intelligible. ® How do the hollows and solids by 
Fe fitting on to one another” produce “ the mixture 
as of wine and water”? This saying of his is over 
our heads ; it is quite beyond our perception what 
we are to understand by the “ hollows ”’ of wine and 
water. Further, in point of fact, a horse is the off- 
spring of two horses, an ass of two asses, a mule of a 
horse and an ass—+.e., its sire is a horse and its dam 
an ass Or vice versa. Why i is it then that a horse and 
an ass produce something so “ dense ” that the off- 
spring formed is infertile, whereas the offspring 
resulting from a male and female horse or from a 
male and female ass is not infertile? After all, the. 
secretion of both the male and of the female horse is 
* soft,” and both sexes of the horse unite with asses 
of the opposite sex. The reason why in both these 
cases the offspring produced is infertile, according to 
Empedocles, is because the one product of the two 
soft “ seeds ” is something (“ dense’). But then so 
it ought to be when the two seeds originate from two 
horses. If only one sex of the horse united with the 
ass, it would be open to Empedocles to say that the 
cause of the mule’s infertility was the dissimilarity of 
that one sex to the semen of the ass. In fact, how- 
ever, there is no difference in quality between the 
seed of the ass with which it unites (to form a mule) 

* No such reference can be found. 
» Cf. Anal. Post. 100 b 9. 

251 

ARISTOTLE ot 
747 b ~ ” , PR \ > , Dr ny ond ws - . 
ouyyevods. -éru 8 iho amddetkis KaT dporepay 
Elpnrat opoles Kal* Tob OrjAcos Kal Tod ippevos, 
25 yevrva 8° 6 dppny EmTaeTyNS wv pioves,” ws daoty: 
adn’ 7 On Aeva. dyovos orws,* Kal avira 7 Ha) €K- 
tpépew eis TéAos, ezel aon Kina eoxev jptovos. 
"lows 5é parXov dv ddc€erev addekis elvar 
mbar TOv eipnevwv Aoyixy. A€yw Se oyuKny 
dua TodTo, 6Tt dom Kalddov padAov, Ttoppwréepw 
30 rOv olkeiwy eotiv apy@v. €ote 5€ TovavTn TIS. 
> A > < ~ »” ‘ / ¢ . \. 
ei yap €€ dpocidav dppevos kat OnAcos opoeides 
pocount mépuce Tots yevvyjoagwy dppev 9 One, 
olov €K KUVvOS dppevos Kal OmAcos. KU@VY appnvy 7 
Orireva, Kal e& érépwv TH cider Erepov TH elder, 
oiov «i KUwyv €repov A€ovTos, Kal ex KUVOS dppevas 
35 kat Adovros OjArcos € eTepov Kat ex éovTos dppevos 
748 a Kat Kuvos O7Acos ErEepov: wor ered) asain 
€ / ” \ ~ > / 
jutovos appnv Kat OyAus adiddhopor ovres* TH 
ow > / / > > a \ » ig / 
elder aAArjAots, yiverat 8° €& immov Kai dvov jyLi- 
ovos, eTepa 8° oti TH elder Tabra Kal ot Hpiovor, 
advvatov yeveoBar e& ‘utovwv: erepov yap yevos — 
> er \ 4? § »” \ / A 
5 ovx oldv Te Sia TO €€ appevos Kal OyAcos TAY 
e ~ 2 ek Ud ~ ” ¢ / af 
Opocd@v TavTo yivecBar TH cider, Hytovos 8 rt 
* «atom. P, A.-W.: dpotms hic om. A.-W., qui post dppevos 
inserunt, secuti cod. P, qui ibi opoiws iterum, sed dp0as ees 
2 jysiovos Peck : pdvos vulg.: Platt omisso (cum S$) pdvos 
seribit mox OjAcva <povn>. 

3 dAws eK mavTds 
4 correxi: advaddpwv dvrwv vulg. 

* They are both “ soft,’ according to Empedocles. 
252 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vit. 

and the seed of an animal of its own species.* Further, 
Empedocles. applies his argument equally to the male 
and the female. . But, people say, the male mule 
does generate at the age of seven years; it is the 
female which is totally infertile and that is simply 
because’ she fails to bring the nourishing of the 
fetation’ to its completion (as instances of fetations | 
in mules have been known to occur). 

Still, perhaps.an abstract argument might be con- 
sidered more convincing than those which we have 
already mentioned. I call it an abstract one, because 
in so far as it is a more general argument it is further 
removed from those principles which belong to this 
particular subject. It goes somewhat like this. In 
the normal course of nature the offspring which a 
male and a female of the same species produce is a 
male or female of that same species—for instance, 
the offspring of a male dog and a female dog is a 
male dog or a female dog. Two animals which differ 
in species produce offspring which differs in species ; 
for instance, a dog differs in species from a lion, and 
the offspring of a male dog and a female lion is differ- 
ent in species ; so is the offspring of a male lion and 
a female dog. This being so, it follows that as both 
male and female mules are produced, which of course | 
do not differ in species, and as a mule is the offspring 
produced by a horse and an ass, both of which are 
different in species from the mule, it is impossible for 
any offspring to be produced by mules ; the reason 
being : (a) no offspring of a different species can be 
produced by them, because the offspring of two 
animals male and female of the same species belongs 
itself to that species, nor (6) can a mule be pro- 
duced, because that is the offspring of a horse and an 

253 

748 a 

ARISTOTLE | 7 

e€ immov Kal dvov yiverau érépww ovTwv TO cider 
[ex dé Tay eTepwv TO cide € Etepov ereOn yiveoau 
C@or]. ; obros pev obv 6 Adyos Kaborov Alav Kat 
Kev0s, ot yap pn eK Tay oikelwy apy@v Adyou 
Kevol, ada Soxotow elvar TOV Tpaypatoy ovK 
10 Ovres. 08 yap ek TaV apxYa@v TOV YEwpeTpLK@v 
/ ¢ / A \ > \ ~ EA 7 ‘ \ 
YEwpeTpicot, dpoiws S€é Kai emi Tav GAAwv: TO Se 
\ a A / »” > > / >. > \ 
kevov Soxkel prev elvai Tt, Eore 5’ odfév.  odK adn bes 
0€, Ort TrodAa, Tav py <eéY dpoeidav yevopevey 
yivera yovysia., Kabarrep eAex On) mpoTepov. TobToV 
yey obv TOV Tpomrov oUTeE Trepl tav dAdwy Sei Cnreiv 
15 ovTe mept TOV proucdy: ex d€ TOV brapxovray TO 
yevee TO TOV inmwv Kal TO TOV Ovwv Oewpdv av 
a , \ 27 ¢ a ye’ 
tis paAAov AdBou tiv aitiav, Ste mp@Tov ev 
Exdtepov avT@v €oTt povoToKov ek THY ovyyev@v 
Coiwv, emer? od ovddAnmriKa ta Ondrea ex TaYV 
/ 4 
dppévinv dei, Sidmrep Tovs immous dadeimovres 
20 Cxevovor [dua TO a dvvacbar ouvex@s dépeuv].® 
GAN’ 7 prev immos od KaTapnvesens, aan’ eAdxvoTov 
mpoleTar THY TeTpaTrddwy: 7 8 Ovos ov SéxeTaL T2Y 
dyelav, add’ Loupe? tov ydvov, 810 pactuyotow 
> na ” \ \ \ A eo» 4 
axodovboivres. ere dé yvypdv to Cov [6 dvos| 
a ~ / os 
€or, Sudmep ev rots yeyepwois od OéAcu yiveoBar 
\ 
25 Toros Sia TO SUapvyov elvar THY Pow, olov Trepi 
A 
XKvbas Kal THv Guopov ywpav, obde wept KeArods 
~ ‘ \ ‘ MA 4 
tovs b7méep THs “[Bypias: puypa yap Kal avTn 7 
ex S€ . . . Cov vulg. : eicit Platt. 

2 ae 8 seclusit Platt: habet vulg., &. 
4 seclusit Btf. 

* Of. H.A. 517 a 23. 
254 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vin. 

ass, two animals which differ in species [and it. was 
laid down. that an animal of a different species is 
produced by two animals that differ in species]. Now 
this argument is too general; there is wpe 25 
it, because there is nothing in any argument which 
does not start from the first principles belonging to 
the particular subject. Such arguments may appear 
to be relevant, but in fact they are not. . For a geo- 
inetrical argument, you must start from geometrical 
principles, and the same applies elsewhere ; that 
which is empty, which has nothing in it, may appear 
_ to be somewhat but in fact is nothing at all. But 
also, this argument is false, because many of the 
animals that are produced from parents of differing 
' species are fertile, as I have said earlier. No; this 
- method of inquiry is as wrong in natural science as 
it is elsewhere. We shall be more likely to discover 
the reason we are looking for if we consider the actual 
_ facts with regard to the two species, horse and ass. 
_ First, then, both horse and. ass, when mated with 
_ their own kind, produce only one at a birth; secondly, 
the females do not on every occasion conceive when 
covered by the male, and that is why breeders after 
an interval put the horse to the mare again [because 
_ the mare cannot bear it continuously]. Mares do 
_ not produce a large amount of menstrual discharge ; 
_ indeed they discharge less than any other quadruped ; 
_ she-asses too do not admit the impregnation, but pass 
_ the semen out with their urine ; and that is why 
people follow behind, flogging them.? Further, the 
animal is a cold subject; and as it is by nature so 
' sensitive to cold, it is not readily produced in wintry 
regions, such as Seythia and the neighbouring parts, 
_ or the Keltic country beyond Iberia, which is also a 

255 

. ARISTOTLE.) 
748 a / PY \ 4 \ A Dat 4 ‘A ee “a 
xwpa. dia Tadrnv dé Ti airiay Kal Ta dyeta 
> , mith > ¢ a ¢ ; > 
emtBaAdovat Tots dvois oby Womep Trois immdls KaT 
> / > \ \ \ , b Mics yee > 
tonpeptav, aAAd mepit tpomds Oepwas, Smas ev 
é > ~ 7 ov ») , ~ A 
30 dAcewh yinra dpa ta mwdrla (ev rH adtH yap 
yiverar ev H av dyxevOR: enavtov yap Kver Kal 
immos Kat dvos). ovtos 8 womep cipnrar yuypood 
Thy pvow, Kal TIv yovny dvayKatov elvar Tod 
TowovTov yuxpdv. (onpelov S€ rovTov: dia TodTC 
yap, €ay pev intros dvaBh emt wyevpevnv td 
évov, od diadpbeiper tiv Tod dvou oxetav, 6 8’ dvos 
2A > ~ / A ~ o \ 
35 €av eravaBh, Siapbeipe tiv tod immov dia 
7, \ ~ / if - 
748 b puxpoTynTa THV Tod omepparos.)  oTav jrev ovv 
> 7 ~ ra \ \ 
GAA nAots pux8Gou, odleras dua tHhv Oar€épov Gep- 
pornta, Oepudorepov yap TO amo Tod immov azo- 
Kpwopevov' 7 bev yap Tob dvov yuypa Kat 4 BAH 
Kal 7 youn, 4 Sé€ Tod immov Oepporepa. Grav 
oe ON \ 2 A Wore A 24 cul 
5 x09 7 Oeppov emi puypov 7 pvxpov emt Oeppov, 
ovpPaiver adro per TO ex ToUTwWY KUNA ‘yevdopevov" 
4 \ a> > > 7 > / 
owlea0a Kai radr’ e& ddAdAjAwy elvar yovrpa, TO 
8 €k rovTwy pnréte yovysov addr dyovov eis 
TeActoyoviar. 
“Odws 8 timdpxovtos éxarepov edpvobis mpos 
ayoviav, T@ Te yap ovw bmdpxyer TA GAAa Ta €ipy- 
10 peva,, Kat €av pr peta tov Bddov tov mp@tov 
apénrar yevvav, ovKére yevva TO Tapdmay: ovTws 
emt” puuKpod exeTat TOO dyovov eivar TO GOpa TOV 
é6vv. dpoiws S€ Kal 6 immos: eddhuijs yap mpos 
1 yev- PSYZ*: yw- vulg. 
2 éni om. Z. 3 rod P, Platt: 76 vulg. 

* i.e.,a mare; cf. H.A. 577 a 13, 28, 
» According to H.A. 577 a 18, this happens at the age of 
23 years; see also 545 b 20. 

256 

OL 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vin. 

cold quarter. For this reason they do not put the jack- 
asses to the females at the equinox, as is done with 
horses, but at the time of the.summer solstice, so that 
the asses’ foals may be born when the weather is 
warm. (Since the period of gestation in both horse 
and ass is a year, the young are born at the same 
season as that when impregnation takes place.) As 
has been said, the ass is by nature cold ; and a cold 
animal's semen is, of necessity, cold like itself. (Here 
is a proof of it. If a horse mounts a female * which 
has been impregnated by an ass, he does not destroy 
the ass’s impregnation; but if an ass mounts ‘her 
after a horse has done so, he does destroy the horse’s 
impregnation—because of the coldness of his, own 
semen.) Thus when they unite with each other, the 
impregnation remains intact by reason of the heat 
resident in one of the two, viz., that of the horse, 
whose secretion is the hotter. “Both the semen from 
the male and the matter supplied by the female are 
hotter in the case of the horse ; with the ass, both 
are cold. So when they unite—either the hot one 
added to the cold, or the cold added to the hot—the 
result is (a) that the fetation which is formed by them 
continues intact, i.e., these two animals are fertile 
when crosséd: with’ each other, but (6) the animal 
formed by them i is not itself fertile, and ‘cannot: pro- 
duce perfect. 

Besides, both horse ‘and ass’have a general natural 
disposition to be infertile. I have already mentioned 
several points about the ass, and another is that 
unless it begins to generate after the first shedding 
of teeth,” it never generates at all ; so close does the 
ass come to being infertile. It is the same with the 
horse ; it is naturally disposed to be infertile ; all 

K 257 

ARISTOTLE OFFA TARO 

7H dyoviav, Kat Tooodrov Neier TOO dyovos elvav 
door TO yeveoBat TO €k TOUTOU Yuxporepov: TOore 
d¢ yiverau, orav pix0n TH TOD Ovov dmoxpicet. Kat 
15 6 dvos dé doatrus puKpod deiv kara Tov otketov 
ourdvacpor a diyovov yevrGs, Wore OTav TMpooyernrat 
TO Tapa poow, ei TéTE évds pOAus YEvVTTUKOY, ef 
dN} de Hv, TO eK TovTwWY ETL paNov ayovov Kat 
Tapa puow obfevos Sejoer Tob dyovoy elvar, day’ 
e€ avaykns éora dyovoy, . tes 
20 MupBaiver dé Kal ra, owpara, Ta TOV ‘hpuedveny 
peydAa yivecbar dia TO THY amdKpiow THY es TA 
Karapnvia tpérecOar eis thy avénow. °émet 3” 
eviatatos 6 ToKETOS TOV Tovodrony, od povov avA-~ 
AaBety Set rH Tiplovoy ° ‘aAAa Kal exOperpat: Toot 
8 advvatov Ha) yivopevwv Karapnvicy Tats e 
25 Hpovois ov syiverou, GAAd TO pey dxpnorav pete 
TOO TEpiTTwpaTos TOD EK THs KUaTEWS eKKpiveTat 
(Sidzrep odd€ TaV-dpOpwv ot ryiovor of .dppeves 
dadpaivovtar TaV Onrerav, wotep TaAAa Ta jLco~ 
vUXa, GAN’ avroo Tob TEpLTTONarOR, Ta 5” aa, 
TpemET aL eis THY TOD owparos! avénow Kal 7d 
péyebos. ore ovdAdrafeiv pev evdéxerat wore Ty 
30 OnjAevav, dmep Hdn daiverar yeyoves, excbpeypat bé 
Kal efeveyneiy ets ‘téAos advvarov. 6 8 dppny 
' moTe ‘yevynoeev av Sid Te TO Bepporepov elvat Tod 
OjAeos dice TO appev, Kal Sia TO pr) ovpPdA- 

1 tod cwpatos P, Platt: om. vulg. 

* These two statements are of course of general validity, 
258 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vit. 

that is wanting to make it such is that its secretion 
should be colder, and this occurs when it is united. 
with that of the ass. In the same way the ass comes: 
within an ace of generating infertile offspring even 
whoo ys mates with its own kind ; so that when there 

e additional factor of unnatural mating beside 
the difficulty it has in producing even a single young 
one in the normal way, the resultant offspring is still 
more ‘infertile and unnatural; in‘fact, it will lack 
nothing to make it completely infertile, ‘and will be 
infertile of necessity. 

Furthermore, female mules grow large in size. 
This is because the secretion intended for the men- 
_ strual flow is diverted to produce growth. And 

since the period of gestation in such animals lasts 
a year, the female mule not only has to conceive but 
has to nourish the embryo all that time ;. and this is 
impossible unless menstrual flow is being produced. 
None is produced in mules: the unserviceable part 
of the nourishment is passed out together with the 
residue that comes from the bladder (which explains 
why male mules do not smell at the pudenda of the 
females as the other solid-hoofed animals do, but at 
the residue itself); the rest of the nourishment is 
diverted to growth of the body and to size. Hence 
although it is possible for the female to conceive 
occasionally—and indeed the fact is established that 
this has happened—it is impossible for her to nourish 
an embryo for the full period and bring it to the birth. 
The male may occasionally generate (a) because ¢ the 
male is by nature hotter than the female, and (6) 
because the male does not contribute any corporeal 

and are cited here to explain how the male mule may be able 
to generate. 

259 

748 b 

749 a 

ARISTOTLE (3) 74 4NWED 

Acobau mpos THY pig odpa pindev TO Gppev. (7d 
e dmoreheabev yiveraw yirvos. tobTo 8 €oriv 

35 Tptovos dvdanpos* Kal yap eK TOO immov Kal To 

ovov ylvovrat yirvo, dray voonon TO Konya ev TH 
borépa. core” yap 6 yivvos dorep- Ta. perdxoupa 
ev Tots xolpois: Kal yap exet To mmpwbev ey * : 
dorépa Kaeirae perdxotpov. yiverat be Towbros 
ds av TUXD TOV Xotpwv. Opoiws dé yivovrat, Kat 

5 ot Tuypatoe Kal yap. ovTOL Tpowvra Th hts P?. 

Kal 70 péyebos €V TH KU?I)COEL, Kal low Gaonep 
peTaxoupa Kal yivvot. } 54. quran 

a 
iT; cr en 

“ According to H.A. 577 b 21, a ginnos is the offspring of 
a mule and a mare; and there, as here,.a ginnos is also said 
to be the diseased offspring of a mare, and is eek shades with 
dwarfs and metachoira. — Aristotle thus compares t 
of the union of mule and mare with the diseased or ifovaad 

wnt ft 
: 

260 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, II. vin. 

ingredient to the mixture. The final result which is 

produced is a ginnos.* This is a deformed mule, for 
ginnoi are produced also from the horse and the ass 
when the fetation gets diseased in the uterus, the 
ginnos being comparable to the metachoiron which 
occurs among swine, since in that case too it is the 
offspring which has been deformed in the uterus 
that is called a metachoiron: any pig may happen 
to be born thus deformed. Human dwarfs too are 
formed in a similar way :_ they too become deformed 
in their parts and stunted in size during the time 
of gestation, and thus are comparable with metachoira 

_-and ginnot. 

offspring which sometimes result from the union of male and 
Gaile of. one and the same species. For metachoira see also 
70b 7. 

261 

j i¢ SOT? HA ix) 

fyi )- of deothovracti 
bonthoi 
5, SOMERTD, 

Posad 2: runt pt atte 
749 a 10 I epi pe obv THs TOV Hprdviny drexvias Binakcc 
Kal rept TOV SwotoKxodvtww Kat Ovpale Kat ev 
abvrois+ év de Tots @orokotat TOV evatpicay Th pep 
TapanAnotws: €, exeL Ta mept Tas ‘yevécers abrois TE 
Kal Tots meCois Kat tavtov Tt AaBety ort wept 
mavrov, TH oe EXEL duadopas Kal mpos GAN Aa. Kal 
15 pos Ta mela tov Cobwy. _yiveran pev ob: dard 
ovvdvacpob_ mdvra ddws, Kal mpotepevov yoviyy ets 
To OAAv ToD appevos* TOV oe @oroKovvTwv at pev 
opvibes mpotevrat TéAcvov @ov Kal onhnpodeppov, 
€av pu) Te 7NpwOAR Sia vocov, Kal mdvra dixpoa Ta 
TOV opvibeov eorly, Tov & ixPdeov ot pev oehaxes- 
20 Seis, Womep cipynrar moAAdKus, ev airois @oToK?- 
cavres CwotoKotot, pweraotdvtos Tob wWod e€ adAov 
ToTov THs voTtépas «is dAAov, padaKkddepjov Se 
TO @ov Kal Ouoxpwr éotlvy abtadv. eis dé jLdvos 
od lworoKet THY TowovTwy ev adt@, 6 Kadovpevos 
Bdrpaxos: mept ob tiv aitiav totepov AeKréov. ot 
25 d€ dAAou Goourep WoToKobat TOV iyOdwr, wovdypwv 

* Although most Ovipara are flying or swimming animals, 
some of course are mela, but by wea Aristotle here means 
viviparous animals only. 

> 7.é., an egg which does not increase in size after deposi- 
tion ; see below, 1. 25. 

° i.e., there is no difference of yolk and white. 

262 

a 

BOOK TIT 
We. naie ‘iepakes about fi. scerility of mnths, amd I 
about the animals which are viviparous both exter- |. Blooded 
nally and internally. We now pass on to those (continued). 
blooded animals which are oviparous.. The pheno- °"?*"° 
mena of generation here are on the one hand similar 
to those which obtain in the animals that walk,” so 
that the same statement will serve for all of them ; ; 
on the other hand, these animals exhibit certain © 
differences not only as between themselves, but also 
when’ compared with the animals that walk. Their 
generation. isthe result of copulation, 7.e., of the 
emission of semen into the female by the male : : this 
applies to all of them, of course. But beyond that 
there are variations : (a) Birds produce a perfect ° 
egg with a hard shell (unless it be deformed by 
disease). All birds’ eggs are of two colours. (5) The 
Selachian fishes, as I have often repeated, are inter- 
nally oviparous but bring forth their young alive, 
after the egg has moved from one position in the 
uterus to another. | Their egg is soft-shelled and of 
one colour only.*- The fish known.as the fishing- 
frog“ is the only one in this class that is not internally 
viviparous. »The cause of this. will have to be stated 
later. (c) All other fishes that are oviparous pro- 

* Probably Lophius piscatorius ; see 754 a 26, n. 
* At 754 a 25-31. 
263 

ARISTOTLE 

749 a : x a ae ee eee SS , 
peév mpotevrat 70 cov, atedés 5€ TobTo- AapBaver 
yap efw Ty avenow, dua T7V adriy airiay ov 
nvmep Kal Ta €ow TeAcvovpeva TOV par. 

Ilepi pev odv r&v torepOv, tivas Exovor Sa- 
gopas Kai dia Tivas airias, elpnrar mpdrepov. 
Kat yap Tav CwotoKovvTwy,7a fev ava mpos TO 

30 broldpare ever Tas borépas, Ta S€ KaTw mpds 
tois apOpos, avw pev ta ceAaywddn, Kdtw dé.7Ta 
‘Kal év abrois Cqoroxobvra: KaL Odpale, olov av- 
Operrros Kal immos Kal tOv dd\Awv Exaorov. TOv 
TowovTwV. Kal TOY potoKowyrav Ta piv Karo, 
Kabazep TGV ixwv of dorokobvres, Ta 8 ave, 
Kabamep ot opyibles. ) ated eit 
35 Loviorarat prev ody Kujpara rots _dpviot ‘Kat 

749 b adropara, a Kadotow ob Save pv kal Leddpud. twes, 
ywera de Tatra Tots pa) mrnTtiKots nde yapuped- 
vot. Tdv. dpvidwr, adAd Tots wodvydvois, dua TO 
TOAD mepirreyptt Tar exew (rots d€ yapibavvew 
ets Tas mrépuyas Kal Ta mrEpa TperecBat TP 

5 rovadtyy dmroKprow, TO be gOpa jpucpov éxew Kal 
Enpov. Te Kal Depysr’), Tv 8° amoKprow THY Kara 
pQvwwdy. Kal. THY youre mepit ropa elvac’ emel ov 
Kal 7) TOV. mTEp@v dvous, Kal yy TOO oTEpuatos 
yiverau €k mepitTwoEws, ov Svvaran 77 pvars en 
apxperepa| moAuxoetv. bua Thy auray dé radray 

10 airiav® TO pev yapipeovuxa our’ eaves corty 

lL acutum =... |?) Kai post aiziay coda : del. Platt. 

* 7.€., the cause wees controls the growth of the egg to 
perfection. 

264 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

uce an egg of one'colour only, but this egg isimper- 
ect—its growth takes place away from the parent, 
and the Cause concerned * is just the,same as for * 
e eggs which are perfected within the parent. 
ih polite already spoken about the uterus of these 
I have said what are the differences they , 

show, ea kk are the Causes. Thus, some of the 
viviparous animals (the Selachian, fishes) have the 
uterus high up towards the diaphragm,’ others 
(the adicaate which are both internally and externally 
viviparous, such as man, horse, and all such animals) 
have it down by the pudenda. And of the oviparous 
animals some (such as the oviparous fishes) have it 
ae down, others (such as the birds) have it high up. 
Fetations ‘arise in‘ birds spontaneously as well (as (:.) Biras. 
‘in‘the normal way) ; some people call them: wind- 
eggs or zephyria.°. They occur in those birds. which 
are neither good fliers nor crook-taloned but which 
are prolific.*. The reason is :. (a) these have a great . 
deal of residue, whereas in the crook-taloned birds 

secretion is diyerted to produce wings and wing 
feathers and_their body is small’ and solid and hot; 
nd (6) the menstrual secretion and the male semen 
are residue ; ; therefore, as both feathers and semen 
alike are formed out of residue, Nature cannot provide 
a large supply for both purposes. And it is for this 
‘same cause that the crook-taloned birds do not 
padulge much in ae on are not rine prolific, 
: > See note on 717 a 2. 

© See note on 753.a 22. 

@ See table of birds, p. 368. 
* i.€., produce a large number of eggs (or young). I use 
* prolific ” throughout to translate zoAvyovos and zoduréxos. 

4 For the smallness of the body of crook-taloned birds 
he from their wings), ef. P.A. 694 a 8 f. 

265 

749 b 

ARISTOTLE TUM . 

ovtTe troddyova, Ta dé Bapéa Kat TOV aTHATiKaV 
dowv Ta owmara dyKosdn, xabdrep TmepioTepas 
Kal TOV Towdrwv. Tots pev yap Bapéor Kat p24) 
mrariKois, ofov dAcKropior Kal mepouge ‘Kal Tots 
adAAows Tots Towovrots, TrOAd yiverat 1 irrepa 

15 TOLodToV- 510 Tad Te Gppeva avr@v OXEUTUKa Kal Ta 
O7jA€ea mpoterau mohAny DAnv, Kat TikTer TOV Towv- 
TWV TA [eV moAAd Ta Oe ToMdxis, ToMd pev ofov 
aAeKtopis Kal mépoué Kal otpovbles 6 6 AiBoxds, Ta. 
dé  TEpioTepwon moAAa [ev ov, ToMd.cus oe: _peragd 
yap eort tadra Tov yappuviywy Kat Tov Bapewy- 

20 mTNTLKG per yap €or womep ra yapupesvoya., 
Anon s° EXEL Too oaw.aros damep 7a’ Papéa, wore | 
dua pev TO TTHTUKG elvaw Kal évradba Tpereabau TO 
mepitrwpa oAlya tikrovor, dia dé TO TAHVOS TOD 
ow@patos Kal Sud To Deppay exyew oy xowdiav Kal 
TenTiKWTaTHY, mpos de rovrou Kat dua TO padiws | 

25 mopilecbar THv Tpodyy, Ta dé yapspwovuxa xarer Os, 
ToAAdkis. 

"Oxevruxa dé Kat moNbyova, Kal Ta. ‘pupa. roy 
opvewy éort, Kabarep evlore Kal TOV puta ay 
yap eis TO GOp.a av[énars ylverau TepiTT@pa omep- 
patiKov. 810 Kal TOV dAcxropiSev at *ASpuavucad 
mohuToKwrarat etour: dud, yap puKpoTnTa. Tob ow- 

30 Paros els. THY TEKYWOW KaTavaNigKeT at  .TpodT}. 
Kal at dyevveis Tey yevvatov moAvroKarepa: 4 
bypoTepa yap Ta owpara THvde Kai’ ae 

_—— 

Ov 
. 

1 -Hvde kai vulg.: radv S€ Y: adradv ray d€ PZ: a 

xat A.-W. 

} 
avy 
“| 
2: Mentioned also at Hid. 558 b 17. Thompson (Glossary? 2, 
aAextpvwv) considers them as a kind of bantam. 4 
266 | 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

whereas the heavy birds and those fliers which have 
poly bodies (such as pigeons and the like) do so. 
ose birds which are heavy and are_not fliers, 
such as common fowls, partridges, and the like, a 
ed ‘deal ‘of this résidue is formed, and that is why 
eir males copulate frequently and their females 
emit a great. deal of matter ; ‘also, some birds of 
this sort lay many eggs, some lay many times thus 
the common fowl, the partridge and >the ostrich 
lay a large number ; whereas the pigeon family do 
not lay a large number, but lay many times, the 
reason being that the last-named stand midway 
between the crook-taloned birds and the heavy 
birds ; they are fliers, like the former, and have a 
bulky body, like the latter. The result is +. (1) As 
they are fliers, the residue is diverted to their wings ; 
hence they lay but few eggs; (2) they are bulky in 
build, their stomach is hot,and very good at-con- 
coction, and, in addition, they can easily get..their 
food, whereas the crook-taloned birds haye. difficulty 
in getting it ; hence they lay often. 

Small birds, too, copulate frequently and are very 
prolific, just as some small plants are : the material 
which might produce increase of bulk turns into 
seminal residue. On this account the Adrianic 
fowls * are extremely prolific ; ; as they are small in 
size, the nourishment is used up for the production 
of offspring. Also, low-bred birds are more prolific 
than high-bred ones,° because their. bodies are more 

» Thompson’s terms (Joc. cit.). The definition of yevvatos 
is given at H.A. 488 b 18 ff. : ebyeves pev yap €oTt 76 eg 
ayabot yévous, yervaioy S€ 7o pH efvoTdpevov €k Tis avrov 
gucews, whence it appears that yewaios =‘ REESE i 
as Thompson there translates it. 

267 

ARISTOTLE © Cts 
749 b 
Tepa, TOV dé é loxvdrepa kat Enporepa: 6 yap 

6 yevvaios ev Tots TovovTous yiveTat odpace ov. 
35 €rt O€ Kal TOV oKeddy Aemrorns Kai dob ever 
ovpBdMerat mpos TO THY dvow TeV Tovosrany 
750 a OxevTUCHY elvar Kal moAsyovor, Kabdmep Kal ént 
TOV avOposmeny: 4 yap eis Ta KOAa Tpopt TpemreT at 
tots TovovTots eis TEpiTTWLA OTTEpULaTLKOV* 6 yap 

exeidev adaipel 7) vais, mpootiOnow evradba. 
5 8é yapipevuxa THY Baow loxupay éxes Kal Ta 

~ 

oxedy maxos exovra. dud Tov Biov- ore bua. ndoas 

TavTas Tas airias ovr OxeuTiKd €oTw ovTE 770- 
Abyova. pddora, d¢ 7 KEY XplS. moAbyovov". pdvoy 
yap oxedov TobTo Kal mivee TOV yapseovixeoy, C7] 
& dyporns Kal 7. ovpdutos Kal 1 €maxtos omep- 
10 pasruKov pera. Tijs drapxovons avTh Deppdrntos. 
tixrer 8° ovd° airy roAAa Atay, AAG, Terrapa| TO 
mAeiorov. | 
“O 8€ KéKkv€ dAvyotoKov eotiv odk Ov jibe 
xos, ote uypos tiv dvow eoriv (Snrot F 7 SerAia 
Tob opvéov), 70 S€ ameppatiKov C@ov det Beppuov 
Kat vypov elvac. ote dé devdov, davepov- bo TE 
15 yap Tv Spvewy SubKeTae TaVTWY Kal EV Weenies 
TIKTEL veoTTLals. . 
Ta oe Treptorepwon dvo- ws 7a moAAa  TiKTeEw 
elw0ev' ovte yap povordiKot etoly (ov0eis yap 

povordKos opvis ahi 6 KoKKvE, Kal obTOS evioTe — 

duToKet) atte ToAAG Tikrovow, GAAa mroAAdKis dvo 

1 atrn Peck: atr7 vulg. 

@ For “ solid ’”’ and “‘ fluid ” see Introd. § 38. 
> Cf. the remarks on the chameleon at P.A. 692 a 22 ff. ; 

268 

on 

+ as 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

fluid and more bulky, whereas those of the high- 
bred birds are leaner and more solid,” this being 
the kind of body in which a thoroughbred and high- 
spirited temper tends rather to make its appear- 
ance; also the thinness and weakness of their legs 
contribute towards making these birds prone to 
copulation and prolific—and this applies also to 
human beings: the nourishment which was intended’ 
for the legs is im such cases diverted to the seminal 
residue : what Nature takes away from one place she 
puts on’at the other. The crook-taloned birds, on 
the other hand, have strong feet, and their legs are 
thick :' this is due to their manner of life; thus on 
account of all these causes they do not copulate much 
nor aré they very prolific. The kestrel is the most 
prolific of them, for this is practically the only one © 
of the crook-taloned ‘birds which drinks, and the 
fluid, both that which is innate and that which it gets 
from without, is productive of semen when combined 
with the heat which is present in it. Even this bird 
does not lay many eggs ; four at the most. 

The cuckoo lays but few eggs although it is not a 
crook-taloned bird, because it is cold by nature (as its 
cowardice ° clearly shows), whereas an animal that 
is abundant in semen must be hot and fluid. That it 
is cowardly is shown by the fact that all other birds 
chase it and that it lays its eggs in other birds’ nests. 

Most birds of the pigeon kind usually lay a couple 
of eggs. . They are neither one-egg birds (there is no 
one-egg bird beside the cuckoo, and this sometimes 

_ lays two), nor do they lay a large number ; but they 

also 650 b 28 (6 yap dd6Bos karapiyer) and 667 a 17 ff., where 
a large heart is-said to produce cowardice because the heart 
is so large that the heat is lost in so large a space. 

269 

750 a 

750 b 

20 

bo 
or 

30 

5 

| 2LAWRAISTOTIED ITA TAH 

7) tpia Ta mdetora yerv@or,' ra dé moAAG B¥o- 

odTou yap ot apipot peta&d Tod Evdos Kat 7oMABv. 
“Oru d€ Tots Trodvyévois Tpemerat eis TO o7réppia 

 Tpody, pavepov ek T&V ovupPawdvtwy. TeV TE 

yap devdpwv. 7a TroMa ToAuKapmyrayTa. Alav ef 3 
avaivera pera THY Popav, 6 OTaV [L1) drohepbi TO 

odpart tpody, Kat Ta emérea tadro mdéoxew 
wv P| \ ‘ £ ~ \ 
€oukev, olov Ta TE xedpoma Kal 6 otros Kal TéAXa 

TA TOUATA* THY yap Tpopryy avaXioxovow eis TO 
orepjia maoav €oTt yap ToAvorreppiov TO yevos 

abta@v. Kal TOV dAexropibuv € eviae mrodvroKnoagar 
Niav ottws Hote Kai dvo reKkelv ev THEpt, peta 
Tv moAuTokiay ameé0avov. dmrépwvor yap yivovras 
Kal ot Opvides Kal. Ta pura: TobTo S €orl TO 7dbos 
direpBodr) mEpiTTwmpatos €xKpicews. aitvov d€ TO 

Towbttov mabos Kai 7 A€ovt. THs ayovias THs! 

: / 4 f ” Lid 
VorEepov TO ev yap mpdTepov Tikrer mévrTe 7 EE, 
ctra TO dorepy eres térTapas, mdAw de Tpets 

oKdpvous, eira TOV €XO[LEVvOV dpiiov € pots évds, el?’ 

oubev, ws e€avadioxopevov Tod TEPITTwpATOS Kat 
dpa THs HwAcckias Anyovons POivovtos Tob azép- 
faros. 
Td A > / \ ¢ / ~ > ‘0 
tou pev obv yiverat rd dernvepwa TOv opvilev, 
ert O€ moiou Trodbyovor Kat odvydyovot ten Kal 
da rivas airias, clpyrau. . 
v 
Tiverar 5€ ra darynvépia, Kabdrep etpyrat sei 
r4 \ \ ¢ 4 > ~ 4, : v ov 
mpotepov, dia TO brdpyew ev TH Onder THY DAnY 
Thv omeppatiKny, Tots 8 dpveos x7) yiveoBar THY 
Tay KaTapyviwy amrdkpiow wonep Tots CwordKois 
Tots evaipous mou yap TovTois yivera, Tots jLev 

270 

ae 

a 

 é 

ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

lay often, producing two, or three at the most, gener- 
ally two, as these numbers are intermediate between 
one and many. - 

_ The actual facts make it Abie that in the prolific 
birds the nourishment is diverted to the semen. Most 
trees, if they have borne an excessive. amount of 
fruit, wither away when the*crop is over, when no 
nourishment is left over for themselves; annual 
plants, as it seems, have the same experience, é.g., 
leguminous plants, corn, and the rest of that sort. 
The reason is that, as they belong to a kind which 
produces a great deal of seed, they use up all their 
nourishment for semen (seed). Some fowls,’ too, 
after having laid excessively—as many as two eggs 
in a day—have died after performing the feat. The 
birds and plants alike become completely exhausted, 
and this condition is simply one of excessive evacua- 
tion of residue. It is responsible for the sterility 
which besets the lion in the latter part of its life, 
To begin with, the lion * will produce five or six cubs 
in a litter, then four the next. year, next time three, 
then two, after that one, and then none at all, which 
suggests that the residue is being used up and that 
the semen is diminishing as the prime of life abates, 

We have now said which are the birds that produce 
wind-eggs, and what sorts of birds are prolific and not 
prolific, together with the causes thereof. 

Why are wind-eggs formed? As has been said 
earlier, their formation is due to the fact that though 
seminal matter is present in the female, with birds no 
discharge of the menstrual fluid take place as it does 
with the blooded Vivipara ; ; in all of the last-named 
it does take place, and it is greater in some, smaller 

® Cf. 760 b 23. 
271 

Wind-eggs. 

750 b 

ARISTOTLE!) A545) 

mein, Tots 3° eAdrra, Tots de TooaUTy : TO) AR bos 
Ware Ooov ye emuonpuaivery. “Opotws 8° ode Tots 
ixBvou, Kabdaep" Tois opviow" duo Kat Tovrous 
10 yiverau pev _ dvev oxeias © ovoTaois KUN ITWV, 
[dpolws Kal Tois opviow, |* troy 8 edie! 
pvyporépa yap 9 pvots adTav. 7 be yorop.ery Tots 
CworoKors dmdKptots Tov Karapnvicy ovviorarae 
Tots Opvict KaTa TOUS iicvoupevous ‘xpovous Tod 
TEPITTOMATOS, Kal dua TO TOV TomoV elvaL Ocppov 
15 TOV Tpos: T@ Sualaopare TeAcrobrat Tots peybeow, 
mpos de ay yeveow dedi} Ka ratra Kal 7a Tay 
ixQvov Opotas avev Tis Tob dppevos youns”, ) Ss 
aitia ToUTWwY cipnTar mpdoTEpov. ov yiverau Se Ta. 
brnvemwa Tots arTytikois THv dpvidwy Sia Thy 
adrny airiav dv Avrep ovde TodvTOKEl TA ToLadTa*: 
Tois yap yaprpuvw ddtyov TO wepitrwpa, Kal 
20 mpoodéovrat Tob dppevos mpos TV Oppay iris Tov 
Trepirresparos® exkptoews. mreiw dé Ta Sanvepa 

yiverat tov yovtpiesy wav,’ eAdrren d€ TO peyebos 

dia peiay airiav Kal Thy adriy: dua pev yap TO 
ateAn eivar eAdtTw To peyebos, dia be TO TO péye- 

25 Bos eAarrov mew TOV ap ov. Kal HrTov dé Hoea 

> 
Sud TO aTENTOTEPA elvan: €v Tact yap TO TET EL 

[evov yAv«drepor. 
“Ori pev ody ovte Ta, TOV épvidea 0 ovTE Ta Tay 

1 fort. <odde> supplendum. 

2 secl. A.-W.: dpoiws om. S, dpvcw om. Z. 

3 hic lacunam statuit. Platt. 

A TEPLTTPATOS PSYX, A.-W., Platt : owéppatos vulg. 

° yovipey adv A, -W.., ovis convenientibus generationi X: 
yorm yryvopevwy Z*, vulg. : yovav yey. PSY. 

4 7,¢,, to mark that it belongs to a class which exhibits the 
272 

rn 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, It. I. 

in others, and in.some just enough to serve as an 
indication.* Similarly, there i is no discharge i in fishes, 
any more than i in birds : and therefore in fishes too, 
{just as in birds, _fetations arise without previous 
copitiison thoug they are less obvious ; that is 
because their nature is colder. What corresponds 
to the seeretion of the menstrual fluid which occurs 
in viviparous animals arises in’ birds at the times 
proper for that residue, and as the region: by the 
diaphragm is hot these fetations reach perfection in 
respect of size, though for the purpose of generation 
they are imperfect, both in birds and fishes, without 
* the semen of the male. The cause of these things 
has been given earlier. . Wind-eggs’ are not formed 
in the birds that are fliers ; the reason why this is 
so and why birds of this sort aré not very prolific 
layers is one and the same >: inthe crook-taloned 
birds the residue is scanty, and they. need the male 
to give the impulse for the discharge of the residue. » 
wind-eggs, are formed in larger, numbers than 
the ones which are fertile but, they are smaller in 
size; both facts are due to one and the same cause : 
they are smaller in sizé because they are imperfect, 
and they are more in number because their size is 
smaller. They are less pleasant to eat because they 
are more unconcocted, for that which has been con- | 
cocted ° always makes the more tasty morsel. 
Now it, has. been- sufficiently. established by ‘ob- 

phenomenon, ‘A’ similar remark is’ made’ at* 'P-A. 689 b 5 
about the stumpy tail of certain animals. 

> Platt’s assumption of a lacuna here is .unnecessary 
Although aryrixe and yopupavuxa are not simply conmeriiles 
all yapwavexa are aryteKd, and clearly Aristotle is here think- 
ing of them as especially good examples of fliers. 

© The Greek word also connotes.** matured,”’ “* ripened.” 

273 

ARISTOTLE say vi ; 

pee iyOvwv" TeAevodrat _mpos THY yéveow davev TaV 
dppéevenv, iKavas drrat, mept dé Tob ‘yiveoBat 
Kal ev rots ixOvou KUnpaTa dvev TOV dppevenv, 
30 odx opoiws, pdAvora 8 emi THv ToTapiwv écbparat 
[mept TOUS _ pudpivors | <rod)7,0° ovpBaivov: €vLol 
yap «d0ds exovtes Wa daivovra, Kabamep ev tais 
ioropiaus yéypamrar mept aita@v. dAws 3S &v ye 

“A ” OA \ / \ pyesty 63 / \ 
rots Opricw ovde Ta ywopeva bua ris oxelas qa 
férev ws emt ro Todd AapBdvew advEnow, eav p17) 
dxevnTat 7 Opvis OUVEXOS. Tovrou ‘8 atriov Gre 
35 Kabdarep emt. TOV yovaucdy TO mAnovdlew Tots 
Tl a dppeot KaTaomd THY TOV yuvaiKetwv deroxprow 
(cAkeu yap To bypov 7 dorépa beppavbecioa, Kat ot 
mOpou dvacropobvrat), TOUTO oupBaiver Kal emt 
T&v opvidwy emdvTos KaTa juKpoy TOD KaTa- 
pnviwdovs mepirta@patos, 6 Ovpale prev odK azro- 

5 kpiverat dia TO OAtyov Elva Kal mpos TH Sialadpate 
dvw tas vorépas, ovAreiBerar 8° «is adriv tiv 
dorépav. Tobdtro yap aver TO wor, Gorep Ta. 
éuppua Ta TOV Corday gro) bud 70d opparod, 
TO emUppeov dua Ths doTepas, eel oray dag 
oxev Oh Td. Oped, mavTa oxedov det SuareAct oa 
10 Exovra, pupa d€ maprray. dt0, Kal mepl TOV, UT- 
mvepioov twes eiwbact Aéyew ws od yeyvopeveny 
GAN’ ws drrohepdrov eK mporépas dxetas ovr. 
todto 8 éoti weidos: Anta yap tkav@s Kal emt 

1 obre 7a Tay ixPiwv om. Y., ova piscium non complen- 

ie x. 

2 rept rods epvOpivovs cvpBaivov vulg.: (76 Z pro mepi rods 
ép.): haec aliena esse monuerat Buss., secl. A.-W.; todro 
Peck. cupBaivov post édparar SY. 3 th Peck. 

274 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

servation that neither in birds nor in fishes do the 
_ fetations attain perfection for the purpose of genera- 
_ tion apart from the males ; with regard to fetations 
being formed apart from the males in fishes as well, 
this has been observed, though to a less extent, to 
occur, but it has been noticed most in the fresh- 
water fishes.* Some of them, as we can see, have 
eggs from ‘the very outset, as is recorded in the 
Researches. Speaking generally, in birds at any 
rate even the impregnated eggs usually do not grow 
unless the hen is trodden continually. The reason 
for this is, that, just as in the case of women inter- 
course with the males draws down the discharge of 
the menstrual flow (since when the uterus’ has been 
heated it draws © the liquid and the mouths of the 
passages are opened), so with birds: the. same thing 
occurs ;| the, menstrual -residue. advances little by 
little. It is not discharged externally because there 
is not much of it and the uterus is high up towards 
the diaphragm, but it runs down and collects in the 
uterus itself. ‘This liquid, of course, which percolates 
through the uterus, makes the egg grow, just as that 
which passes through the umbilical cord makes the 
embryos of Vivipara grow, for when once the birds 
have been trodden, they all continue almost always 
to have eggs, albeit quite small ones. In view of this, 
some people are in the habit of saying that wind- 
eggs are not formed: (independently) either, but are 
merely relics of an earlier impregnation. This how- 
ever is untrue. It has been sufficiently established by 

_ * The reference tothe erythrinus which several mss. have 
at this point is out of place; ef. H.A. 567 a 27. 

® At H.A. 567 a 30. 

© See above, 739.a 35 ff., esp.'b 11 ff. 

ARISTOTLE IT AS 
751 a 
veorra@v ddexropidos Kal xnves. YevOpiever avev 
oxelas. ere de at mepouKes at OnArevar, at 7 a= 

15 oxevTou Kal at dxevwevar Tov els Tas Onpas ayo~ 

peveov, dodpauvopeva” Tod dppevos Kal akovovoat 
- Tis pwvis at pev aAnpobyra at de TiKTOVOL mapa- 
xphua. tod S€ 7aBovs® alzov tabrov 6 Orrep ent TOV 
dvi peony xa TOV TetTpamodwy eav yap Spyavra 
TUXY) TO. oapara ™pos THY opAtay, Ta pev Sdvra 
Td. de puKpas yevoperns Bigews mpoterat o7eppa. 

20 7a Se ToLavTa Tay opveuy OXEVTUKA, Kal, aa 
oTrEppa. THY, puow € cory, wore Hucpas deiobar TAS. 
KWI}TEWS, oray opyaura TUX), Kal yiveobau TAD 
TV EKKplow adrois, wore Tots, pev avoxevTous 
darnvepioa ovvioracbas, Tots & dyevpevois aildver 
aba Kai teAcvodabat Taxews. 

25 Tay be Ovpale @oroKovyra ot pev SpviBes 7po~ 
ievrar TO @ov réXewor, of 8 ixOves dreNés, aN” 
e€w NapBadver THY avenow, Kabarrep elpyrau kal 
TporEpov. aitiov 8° Ore ToAbyovey €oTl TO THY 
ixQiwv yévos* advvatov obv €ow mroAda AapBdvew 
tedos, Sudzrep dmrorixTovaw fo. taxeia 8 i) 

30 mpdeots* ai yap doTépat mpos Tots apOpos ta&yv 
Bvpatle @oroKovvTay iyOvwv. 

"Bore dé Ta pev Tov opvibeov Shanon, Ta d€ Tay 
ixOdanv povdxpoa Tdvrov. THs Se diypoias TH 
airtay dou Tis ay €k Tis. Suvdpews _€Karépov Trav 
popiwr, Tob Te AevKod Kal TOD wypod. yivera joey 
yap 7) amoKpiots ek TOO aiparos |(od0ev yap dvatpov 

1 dodpawopevar P: {Poppdpevan SY: dopdpera Z, vulg. 
2 waBovus| taxous Z. 

@ Of. H.A. 560 b 10 ff. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

observation that they have been formed in chickens 
-and goslings without impregnation. .Again, when 
me female partridges * which are taken out to act as 
decoy-birds smell the male and hear his note, those 
\ afi: haye not been trodden by a) male become 

full of eggs and those which have already been 

trodden at once lay their eggs. The reason why 

this happens is the same as in the case of human 
_ beings and quadrupeds : if they are in heat, some 
_ emit the semen at the mere sight of a female, others 
at a slight touch. Birds of this sort are by nature 
inclined to frequent intercourse and have abundance 
_ of semen, so that when they are in heat the impulse 
_ they need to set them off is small, and emission 
quickly takes place ; the result is that i in those which 
have not been impregnated wind-eggs take shape, 
and in those which have been impregnated the eggs 
quickly grow and reach perfection. 

In the group of animals which lay their eggs exter- 
nally, birds produce their eggs in a perfected state, 
fish in an imperfect state ; but fishes’ eggs continue 
and finish their growth apart from the parent, as 

_ indeed I have said earlier. The reason for this is that 

the fish tribe is very prolific; therefore it is impossible 
for a large number of eggs to reach perfection within 
the animal; hence they are laid externally. Their 
discharge is quickly effected, for in the externally 
oviparous fishes the uterus is near the genital parts. 
Birds’ eggs are double-coloured, but all fishes’ eggs 
"are single-coloured. The cause of the two colours in 
_ birds’ eggs ean be seen from the specific character ° 
of each of the two parts, the white and the yolk. 
The secretion (for the egg) is formed out of the blood 

» Dynamis ; see Introd. § 26. 
277 

Difference 
between 
yolk and 
white. 

‘ 

| VARISTOTLEM AIAN 

751b  @oroxet C@ov)),’ Tro 8 aiua dru eariv bAn Tois 
cwpacw, eipnrat ToMAdKIs. TO wEev ody eoriv eyyd- 
Tepov avrod THs mopdis TOv {popiwy | ywopevov, 
TO Oeppdv: 70 S€ yewdéorepov THY ToD adpatos 
mapéxeTat ovoTacw Kal Topputepov eorw. Bid7Ep 
5 Goa dixpod €oTt THY WAv, THv pwev apynv TO LHo 
Parte eae PUA ML wr shicae 6 
AapBdver €x Tob AcuKod Tis yevécews ev yap T@ 
Depu@ 1, puxuxn apxn), THY d€ Tpodiyy eK Tod 
> ~ a Wi Badroy 
@xpod. Tots pev ovv THY paw Oepuoréepas TeV 
7 / 4 \ > 
Cepeov SuaKe pirat xwpis e€ ob TE 1) apx7) yiverat 
Kat €€ od tTpéperar, Kal TO pev AcvKdV eoTL TO O 
10 wxpov, Kal. mAgov det 7d) AcvKOV Kai Kabapov. tod 
wxpod Kal yewdous: Tots 8’ Arrov, Ceppots Kat 
bypoTepois TO WyYpoV TA€ov Kal bypdorepov.| OmEp 
ovpPaiver emt TOv Aywvaiwy dpvewy: byporepor yap 
Thv dtow Kal vypdérepor tav melevdvTwy eioiv 
> , Ld \ Aa ~ 4 \ ” 

Opvewy, WATE KAL TA WA TOV TOLOVTWY ee EXEL 

\ 0 t \ bey (43? Nai@yal oN 

15 THv KaAovpevnv A€KiGov Kai rrov Wypav' dua To 

Hrrov amoKxekpioba: To AevKOV. Ta O° 7799 Kal 
ys 

poypa tHv dvow TOV woToKovvTwy Kal ett bypa 
padov (rotodtov § éart 7rd ra&v ixOdwv yévos) 
ovd amoxekpysevov exer TO AevKoV did TE [UKPO- 
TyTa Kat dua TO TARVOS Tod yuxpot Kai yewdous- 

, / , A ~ > , } 
20 dudwep yiverar povoxpoa mavTa ta THY, ixOiwy, 

1 secl. A.-W., Platt. fet pee 

* The white ; because hot substance has to do with Soul ; 
see immediately below, and 762 a 18 ff. and P.A. 652 b 7 ff. 

>» See 744-b 32 ff. and note. 

¢ For the two sorts of zpo¢y see 744 b 32 ff. Both yolk 
and white are now known to be nourishment; Harvey 
demonstrated the unreality of the distinction here made.— 

Aristotle of course knew nothing of the germinal area on the © 

278 

] 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, TH: 1. 

[(no bloodless. animal lays eggs)], the blood, as I 
have often stated, being the matter for animal organ- 
isms. One part of the egg, the hot part, is closer 
to the form of the developing creatures ; the other, 
the more earthy part, supplies the wherewithal for 
building up the bodily frame and is further removed 
from the form.’ That is why in the case of all double- 
coloured eggs the young animal gets its “ principle ” 
of generation from the white, because hot substance 
is the place where the soul-principle is to be found, 
while it gets its nourishment from the yolk.* With 
those animals, therefore, whose nature tends to be 
hotter than others we find there is a clear distinction 
between the part from which the “ principle ” is 
formed and the part from which the nourishment is 
derived the one is white, the other yellow, and there 
is always more of the pure, white part than there is 
of the earthy, yellow part... With the animals that 
are less hot and more fluid, there is more yolk in the 
egg and it is more fluid. This occurs in the case of 
the marsh-birds, since they are more fluid and colder 
in their nature than the land-birds, so that the eggs 
of such birds contain a great deal of what is called 
yelk (lékithos) and it is less yellow, because the white 
is less distinctly separated from it. _ Pass on a further 
stage to those oviparous animals which are cold in 
their nature and also still more fluid (the fish tribe 
answers to this description), and im their eggs the 
white is not distinct at all; this is due to their small 
size and to the abundance of the cold and earthy 
matter. And that is why all fishes’ eggs are single- 

yolk; and it was again Harvey who demonstrated that 
the “‘cicatricula ’ was the point of origin of the embryo, 
“the first Principle of the Egge.” 

279 

751 b 

752 a 

25 

30 

or 

- 

ARISTOTYE!! Ff htt 

kal’ wes pev OXpa Acuna; ws b€ Aevia aypa. 7d 
dé TOV opveay Kal TO Drrqvepua. exeu rade rip 
dixpovay; Exel yap Ca 0b. éxdrepov, €oTar Tov 
popiar, kal d0ev.7 apyn Kat obev a Tpodthy. aaa 
Taor’ aren Kat mpoodedpeva, Tob Gppevos-yiveras 
yap Ta Virapejies yovijia, eav ey tive Kaip@ dxev6 
tO TOU dppevos. ouk €oTt Oe vAs Sixpocas atrvoy 
TO Gppev Kal. To Ojdv, ws tod He AevKod dvtos 
ano Tob dppevos, 700 5’ wypot amo Tob BrjAeos’ 
GAN Gpipeo yiverat amo Tod Oy Aeos,. adda Td" ev 
ipoxpov 10 6 Beppov, ev ba0us ev ody ‘earl moNd 
70 Oepudv, drroKpiveT at, ev dcas & odtyor,, od 
ddvarau:.d10 povexpoa ta Kunuata, Kabarep €ipyn- 
rae; Ta TOV TOLOUTWY. 7 dé your; ovviaTNnot* pwovov* 
Kal dia Tobro ‘Td pe mp@rov paiverat Aevkov Kai 
puukpov TO KUNG ev TOS pyar, Tpotov Se @Xxpov 
amav, ovpyuyvupevov. acl mAelovos aiwarwdous: 
tédos 8? amoKxpwvopevov. Tod Oepyod KvKAw' TeEpt- 
lorarau TO ‘AevKdv, Warep bypod 'Céovros, dpoiws 
mdvTn TO yap Aevkov dae ev Sypov, ever SY ev 
ait@ thy Oeppornra thy yuxuxrnv: 80 KvKAw 
amokpiverar, TO, 5° wypov Kal ye@bes EvTds.. , KaY 
TOAAa Guvepdoas Tis wa els KUOTW 4 TL TOLOdTOV 
edn aupt pa Odrrova rovotvTe tiv Tob Beppod 
1 guviornot Peck: cvvéornae vulg. : cvvéorn dé S. ) 
2 uy om. Z. 

® It is of course the hot substance which constitutes the 
white. 

280 

4 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

coloured—they are white, judged by the colour of 
. yolk ; yellow, judged by ordinary white. 
Not. only the eggs but also the wind-eggs of birds 
have this double colouring, because they contain that 
out of which each of the two parts is to come (the part, 
from which the “principle ”” arises and that from. 
which the nourishment is derived), although they are 
imperfect, ‘i.e., they lack the male factor ; since, as 
we know, wind-epgs become fertile if they are im- 
pregnated by the male within a certain time. The 
‘causé of the double colouring is not the two different 
sexes (as if the white were derived from the male and 
the yolk from the female); both alike are derived 
from the female, and the real difference is that one is 
cold and the other hot. So then, in cases where a 
good deal of the hot constituent is present, the hot 
substance is separated from the cold ; but if there is 
not much of it this cannot occur ; and that is why the 
fetations of such animals. are single-coloured, as I 
_ have said. All that the semen does is to “ set ’’ the 
_ fetations, and that is why in birds the fetation is small 
and white in appearance at first, but completely 
yellow as it advances and more bloodlike matter is 
continually being mixed in with it ; finally, as the hot 
substance separates off, the white takes up its posi- 
_ tion around on the outside @ evenly in every direction, 
just as when a liquid boils. <I make this compari- 
_ son), because the white (a) is in its nature liquid, and 
_ (6) contains in itself the soul-heat. Therefore it 
separates off (and arranges itself) all round (on the 
outside), while the yellow earthy part separates off 
within. Also, if anyone pours a number of eggs 
together into a bladder or some such receptacle and 
_ then boils them up by means of a fire which does not 

281 

ARISTOTLE ao ee 
752 a 
Kimow 7 Th ev Tots, gos Sudkprow, Bomep ev évi 
OO, Kobra)" Kal TO €K may To TOV. DOV 
TO [Lev coxpov ev peow yiverau, Kd 8é'7d AevKdy. 4 
Avért ) peev obv Ta pep povdxpoa TO Be ‘Sixpoa TOV 
10 dv, eipnrac- told ug 
I “Aroxpiverat 5° €v rots wots 7, TOU ee apy : 
Kal? 8 mpoorrepuke Th borépg. TO ov,” ral wer 
51) Gvopotov TO Tov duxpdeov Ov, Kal od cs ray | 
otpoyytAov add’ ent Barepa, d&irepow, Sua 79 
Sade pew Seiv? 70)? rod AevKod. ev @. yet. Thy - 
apxnv... Ovomrep ox)npérepoy ra ¥ es ce 
15 KatwOev- oerra lew yap (det Kai ae TY 
dpxny. Kat Sua TOTO eLépxerar vorepoy TOD, od 
TO ou" TO yap mpoomepuKos Uorepov, eLepxeran, 
Kata THY apxnv de mpoorépukev, ev TH o€et 3’ 7) 
apxy. Tov adrov 5° éxew tpdzrov Kad ev Tots TeV 
put @v oTréppiaow: mpoorrepuxe yap Uh px +00) 
20 o7éppaTos Ta pev ev Tots KAdbots, Ta 0 ey rots 
Kehipeor,, Ta 0 ev Tots Tepukapriots. SijAov ve emt 
TOV xyedpoTav: a yap ovvarra. Td (Bibupow Tov 
KUG[LWVY Kal TeV Towovraw omepudrev, ey 
TpooTepuren: 7 oO FRX evraida ToD oTEepparos. 
“Atropgece 0 av Tis Tepl Tis avenocws ae 
25 @av, Twa Tpomev €k THS baTépas ovpBatver, . ye 
pev yap Cea dia. Tod oudadod AapBaver thy po- 

. 
Ss ee lhU!DUmr”tC 

. 

1 (ovrw) Rackham. 2 Setv aet SY. . Gey Peek. { 

Eli ls 

® Of) HiA. 560 a 30 ff. 

% Cf. 767 b 17 ff. et passim. 

¢ That is, the ‘‘ big” end, which is the first to leave the a 
when laid. Platt rinatie that Aristotle must have been a 1 
“ little-endian,” for the germ always floats up to the tong 
whichever way the egg is placed: i; 
282 . 

T 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IIT. 1-1. 

cause the movement of the heat to be faster than the 
separation in the eggs, the yolk settles in the middle 
and the white round the outside of it ¢ ; 7.e., the same 
happens, with the conglomerated mass composed of 
all ee ar as with one single egg. ti 
We have now stated why some eggs are single- 
coloured and others double-coloured. . 
- In eggs the piace where the “ principle ” derived 
from the male ® becomes separate and distinct is the 
point where the ege is attached to the uterus, and 
that gives us the reason why the shape of double- 

- coloured eggs is unsymmetrical, #.e., not perfectly 

round but more pointed at-one end; the reason is 
that that .part.of the white in which the principle is 
situated must be different.. And that is why the 
egg-shell is harder at that place than it is. at the 
bottom *: the.‘ principle ”’ has to be protected and 
safeguarded, That also is why the pointed end of 
the egg comes out last : for of course the part that 
comes out.last is the part that is fastened, which is 
the part where the “ principle’ is, which is the 
pointed end, The same arrangement obtains in the 
seeds of plants. In some plants the “ principle ”’ of 
the seed is fastened on to the twig, in others on to 

Il 
Shape of 
the egg. 

the husk, in others on to the pericarp. This is clear 

in the leguminous plants. The seeds of beans and 
plants of that sort are fastened on at the point where 
the two cotyledons ¢ are joined ; and that is. where 
the “ principle ”’ of the seed is. 

A puzzle may be raised about how eggs grow— Growth of 
how, it may be asked, do they derive their growth ‘° °8¢ 

from the uterus ? Animals) of course, obtain their 

nourishment through the umbilical cord; but by 
¢ The two halves of the pea or bean. 

283 

t 

ARISTOTLE OFT AAT AO 
752 a 

ony, Ta 8 Oa dua rivos ; emrerdijTrEp OdY dorep ot 
onddnxes avra bu" adTav Aap Beaver Tay abEnow. 
el 8 €ore Te Ov ob mpoomepune, TOOTO Trot ‘rpererau 

terAewbvtos; od} yap ouvebépxerat, Kabdrep 6 
30 oudards Tots C@ous* yiverau yap TO TrEpLE OOTPAKov 
terXewhévtos. Td pev obv eipnuevov opbas Unretrae: 
Aavbdver 8° OTL TO yuvdpevov OoTpAKoY Td Tp@rov 
padaKos pay €oTwW, dA Tedewbévros iver ou 
orAnpov Kal padpov, ovTw. oULpeTpws dar’. - 
épxeTar pev éeTe pwadakdv (advov “yap av. Trapetye 
35 TiKTOEVO?), efeABov d°. edOds mHyyvUra puybev, 
752 b ouveEatpilovtos Tob: bypod TaXD bv eee 
Acurropévou | be Tob yewdous. Tovrov 3 Te Tod 
bpevos ear’ _ dpxas Opparddes €or Kara TO o€¥, 
kal amex ETL puiKp@v ovTwy otov addrds.  davepov 
8 €oriv év Tots exPoXipous TOV puxp@v DOV" éav 
yap Bpex9h H dAAws ms prydoaca exBady q 
opvis, ETL aiparadés TE paiverat TO KUO Kat 
exov bv éavToo ordAov HuKpor op. aAwdn. pei 
Covos dé ywopevov mepiteiveTau” paAdov o ros. at 
eAdtTwy yiverar. tehewbevros de TO ogo Tod poo 
TodtTo cupBaiver TO wépas. dbo dé, TOUTM 6 evTOS 
10 dunv, Os opiler TO AcvKOV Kal. TO wYpoV amo TOv- 
tov. TeAcwhévros 5° amodverar Gov TO Wov; Kat 

ou 

a fortasse CworoKoupevors vel Cwordxois scribendum. 

* mepaiverar Z. pro cat eddrrwv . . . mépas et efficientur ova 
citrina, et maxime apud complementum. et cum id 
accidit ut sit emissio X. 

@ See 732 a 32 and note there. | Cf. also 758 b 13 ff. 

Pty es the young of viviparous animals. Perhaps we should 
read * <the young of viviparous> animals,” 

¢ This is a reference to the chalazae, the function and 
development of which are obscure: ci 

284 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. nu. 

what means do, eggs get theirs? (The possibility 
__ that they are themselves their own means of growth, 
as larvae are,* may be ruled out.) If there is some- 
thing by means of which the egg is fastened on, what 
happens to it when the egg has reached its perfec- 
tion? It does not come out along with the egg, as 
the umbilical cord does in the case of animals,” 
because when the egg has reached perfection, the 
shell is formed which envelops it. Well, this is a 
question which it is quite right to ask ; but those who 
ask it fail to notice that the shell as it forms is at first 
a soft membrane, and that it is only. when the egg 
has been perfected that it becomes hard and brittle ; 
and this adjustment is so well timed that it is still soft 
when it leaves the bird (otherwise it would be painful 
to lay), but as soon as it has left the bird it cools, and 
that. makes it set hard, for the fluid part quickly 
evaporates, being very small in quantity, while the 
earthy part remains behind. Now at the outset a 
portion of this membrane, at the pointed end of an 
egg; is like an umbilical cord, and while the egg is 
still small, it sticks out like apipe. It can be clearly 
seen in small, aborted eggs: if the hen is drenched 
{with cold water) or chilled in some other way and 
so drops (the fetation) before its time, the fetation 
_ still has a blood-like appearance and has a small 
_ tail, like an umbilical cord, running through it; as 
_ the fetation gets larger, this tail gets twisted round 
more and becomes smaller; when (the fetation) 
has. reached its complete development, this terminus 
finishes up as the pointed end of the egg. Under- 
neath this is the inner membrane, which acts as a 
_ boundary between it on the one side and the white 
_ and the yolk on the other. When the development 

285 

(ARISTOTLE 11 A 84480 

752 b 
ob} paiverar evAdywws Oo ojupards” avrod yap éeort 

ToD €aydTov TO dk pov. J4 ara Crit aaat 
“H 8° é£080s todvayriov yiverat Tots dois A ris 
Cworoxoupevous: Tots [ev yap emt Kepadny Kal Ty 
apxmys TOS OD viverra 7 eodos olov emi 7ddas. 
15 rovrov 8 aitiov 70 <ipnpevov,’ ore mpoorébure Ke 
Kara TH apxty. BPM i. 
H. de yeveors ek Tod od ovpBatver rois Opyiow, 
éxwatodons Kal cujimerroibons: THS | Spvibos, amo~ 
Kpwopevov ev Tod Caov ek pépovs Tod Wod, ri 
oi auenoe.. AapBavovros. Kal TeAcvovpevov eK. Tod 
Aowrod pepovs, 7) yap pias, SHE THY Te TOD. ov 
20 DAqy ev TO O@ THiqat Kal THY iKkavay zpopryy Tpos. 
TH adéjow: 2 eEret yap od ddvarat redcobv €v adri 

7 opus, OUVEKTIKTEL THV tpodiy ev TO @@- os, 
ev yap CworoKoupevois € ev dw popiw yiverau a 
Tpooy, TO KaAoUpLEVOV yan, ev mats pons Tots 
oo epriae TodTo. Trovet 4 ddous ev Tois Wois, TOv- 
25 vavriov pevrot 7 ot Te avOpwrror otovrat Kal °AA~ 
Kpaicov gnaw o Kporwndrys. ov yap, TO Aevkéy 
eoTt. ydAa, adda TO cxpov TOUTO yep eorw. 
Tpopt) Tots veotrois: of 8 -olovrat To Acuity dua 
THY Susperiira TOU Xpwoparos. ft oes 
Tiveraou Hey oby expatovans, KaBdzrep eipnrat; 

30 THs SpviBos 6 veortds: od pay GAA Kav 7) wpa. 

® The heart. > See 744 b 32 fF. 3 
¢ See pp. xvii. f. @ See 1514, 1. 

286 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1. 

f the fetation is complete, the whole egg is released, 
and, as we should expect, nothing is:to be seen of the 
umbilical cord, because it is the tip of, the. crerenit 
end of the egg. 

s and the yo - of vi viviparous animals come out 
fa posite ways; the latter come out with the 

Rae cree the “ ditudiple ” first *; the egg comes out 
as it were feet first. And the reason I have stated : 
it-is because the egg is fastened at the pice where 
the “‘ principle ” is. 

_. The formation. of birds out of the egg is effected by 
the mother’s sitting on the eggs and. helping to 
concoct them. One part of the egg yields the sub- 
stance out of which the animal is constituted,. the 
remaining part provides the substance whereby it 
grows and is perfected ; Nature puts both in the egg 
—the material for making the animal; and sufficient 
nourishment for its growth,’ since the hen cannot 
bring the young to perfection within herself, and 
therefore when she lays an egg she lays the creature's 
nourishment in it as well.. The nourishment for the 
young of viviparous animals, what we call milk, is 
formed in the breasts, a different part of the body 
| altogether ; but for birds Nature provides this inside 
|their eggs. The truth about it, however, is the 
reverse of what is commonly supposed and what is 
asserted by Alemeon of Crotona.° It is not the white 
of the egg that-is:the milk, but the yolk, because. it 
is the yolk that is the nourishment for the chicks. 
These people suppose that the white is, owing to 
ithe similarity of colour.? 
~ The formation of the chick, then, as I have said, is 
Jeffected by the mother-bird’s sitting upon the egg ; 

motwithstanding, if the climate is Seitienzeea ae 

287 

Incubation. 

ARISTOTLE )) 1) (p> 

752 b 

} eUKparos i) 6 Tomo: dAcewos ev @ dv Keipweva 
TvyXdvaow, exrérreTan Kal Ta TOY dpvibav Kal 
74 Tov TeTpamddwv kal @oToKwv (advra yap eis 
TH viv EKTIKTEL, Kat oupmerrovrat bro Ths & , 
™H YN Deppornros- doa 8° empater Porro. TOV 

35 @oTOKWY Kai TeTpamddwv, Taira mrovet HaNo ov. 

dvrakijs xdpw). 

753 a Tov adrov 5€ tpdzov ylverau rd te TOV. épvibeow 
@a Kat ta TOV Cdwv TOV TeT parody: Kal ‘yap 
oxmpdd_ppa Kal dixpoa, Kal mpos Td Staldpare 
ovviorarat Kabarep Kal Ta TOV dpvibeov, Kal ‘7aMa! 
Tatra advra oupBaiver Kal évros Kal eKrOs, Wore 
57) abry Dewpia TEpt THS airias earl mavrwv. adda 
Ta pev TOY TeTparrodwy 8 loxydy éxmérteTaL Kal 
b70 THs wpas, Ta S€ TOV Opvewy emiKnpdTEpa, Kal 
deirae Tis Tekovons. Coie dé Kat 7 dvots Bovre-. 
ofa tadv' téxvwv alcbyow éemipedAntiKny trapa- 
oxevdlew: adda Tots pev yeipoot Todt’ eumrove? 

10 Léexpt TOO TeKEly pdvov, Tots be Kal mrept Thy TE- 
Aéwow, doa Sé dpovipwrepa, Kat Trepl Ti extpogry. 
Tots & 787°? pddvora Kowwvotar ppovricews Kal 
mpos teAdAewhevta ‘yiverau oun beva Kal diAta, 
Kaldarep Tots TE dvOpsrrous Kal TOV rerpamdbev 
éeviois, Tois 8 dpvice péxpt TOO yevvijcau Kal. éK-. 

15 Opéipau> Sudeep Kal pr emwmdlovear ai OyAcvar, drav. 

1 rev PZ: tiv rev vulg, 2 § j3n Z: 8¢ 34 vulg. 

* (Cf. H.A. 559 a 1 ff, where * ‘ non-fliers ’’ such as part- 
ridges and quails are said to “lay their eggs on the ground _ 
and to cover them over.” Another ‘ non-flier,” the ostrich, — 
was believed by the author of Job (xxxix. 14) to behave in a 

288 } 

= 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

the situation where they happen to be is sunny, the 
eggs of birds ¢ as well as of oviparous quadrupeds get 
concocted without incubation (for all these 
quadrupeds. Tay their eggs on the ground, and they 
get concocted | by the heat in the earth; any ovi- 
parous quadrup eds which visit their eggs and sit'on 
them do so rather for the sake ‘of prokecsins them 
than for any other reason). . 
The eggs of quadrupeds are formed in the same 
way as’ birds’ eggs... They are hard-shelled, and 
double-coloured, take shape up ‘towards. the. dia- 
phragm (as birds’»eggs do), and present. the same 
features in every other respect. both externally and 
internally ; so that studying the cause of any of them 
is the same as studying the cause of them all, Only, 
whereas the eggs of quadrupeds, being so strong, get 
fully concocted by the agency of the climate, birds’ 
eggs, being more fragile, need the mother-bird. It 
looks as though Nature herself desires to provide 
that theré shall be a feeling of attention and care for 
the young offspring. In the inferior animals this feel- 
ing which she implants lasts only until the moment 
of birth; in others, until the offspring reaches its 
perfect development ; and in those that have 
more intelligence, until its upbringing is completed. 
Those which are endowed with most intelligence show 
intimacy and attachment towards their offspring even 
after they have reachedtheir perfect development 
(human beings and. some .of the quadrupeds. are 
examples of this); birds show it until they have 
produced their chicks and brought them: up.;-and on 
this account hen birds which have laid eggs but omit 

similar way :, “she leayeth her eggs on the earth, and 
warmeth them in the dust ” (R.V,). 

L 289 

il “lA MPISTOFUR TTAAN ARO 
753 a 
Téxkwor, Siatibevrat ‘yelpov, “Bomep \ Evds’ Twos 
OTEpLOKOMEVaL TOV ovpdurov. EE APT 
Tedcobrac 8 €v Tois Wois TA boa Oarrov ev wee 
dAcewais Tpepats: ouvepydterat yap, 1. Epa’ ‘kal 
yap. oy mets. Gepporns Tis? cory. 4 Te yap yh 

20 UpTETTEL ™H Oeppornrt, | al, q enpalovo tabro 
TobTo dpa: mpoceyxet™ yap, 73 i, avTh. Geppov, Kal 
Svadbetperan d€ Ta Wa Kal yiveran 7a KaAoUp 
ovpta, paiAAov Kara, THY, Oeppay. pay: dAdywns: 
dorep yap Kat ot olvou ev tats dAeas, oftvovra 
dvarpeTopévys THs iAvos (r0Gr0 « “yap airvov, tis 

25 diab bopas), Kal ev Tos @ots 4) A€KWos: TodTO yap 
ev dudorépors TO yeddes, 506 wal avaborobrat' 6 
olvos Heyvuperns tis iAvos, Kat Ta Pin eae 
wa THS AexiBov. : 

Tots peév ody moAurdkots eafupalseet 76 TotodTov 
edAdyws (0d yap pddiov Thy Spporroveay maaw 
amTodLodvat Oeppaciar, aAAd. Tois prev €AAetrrew Tots 

30 Sé mAcovatlew, Kat avaborobyv oloy oifmovaay), Tots 
Sé yopupavoty dhuyoroKots ovou, opdey TOV 
ovpPaiver tobro: modus [ev yap Kat Tow. dvory 
Odrépov ovpiov yiverat, 76 5€ rplrov, es, €izetv. det: 2 
feppa yap ovra TV dow oloy drephety movet zy 

35 bypornra Ti ev tois ois, €xet yap 87) Kat TH 
piow evayriav 76 TE cbypov Kat To: NevKdv. TO 

753 b pev “yap expov ev Tos 7a&yous miyyvurat, Deppaws- 

prevov de dypaiverac: S10 Kal a ci oh ev! ig 

1) Peppornros coni..AwnWe bin oo) 2 mpooexer SY, ig 

= 

@ According 6 H.A. 560 a 5 ff., ouria is a name given to 
wind-eggs produced chiefly in summer, zephyria (seé 749 b 1) 
to those produced in spring. °° °' Of. 135 a'34 ff. 

290 

' GENERATION OF ‘ANIMALS, III. 1. 

to sit on them, deteriorate in their condition, as 
though they were being deprived of one of their natural 
endowments... . SET HO 1A SO. ONS 

_ Animals reach their’ perfect development in the 

eggs quicker when the days are sunny, for then the 
climate takes a share in the work, concoction being a 
form of heat: the earth helps‘in concocting them 
with its heat, and the sitting bird does exactly the 
same—she infuses her own heat into them as well. 
Eggs get spoilt. and, ourta* (as they are called) are 
produced in the hot season more often than at any 
other, as-is to be expected. In hot, sunny weather 
wines turn sour because the sediment gets stirred up 
—this is what is really responsible for their being 
spoilt—and the same happens with the yolk in eggs. 
Sediment and yolk are the earthy part in each respec- 
tively; and as a result of this earthiness wine becomes 
turbid -when the sediment mixes up with it, and these 
spoilt eggs also become turbid when the yolk does the 
same. ve 

It is only to be expected that this should happen in 
the case of prolific animals, because it is not éasy to 
provide all the éggs with their proper amount of 
heat ;*some will get too little, and some too much ; 
and too much heat will make them turbid, by causing 
them to putrefy, as it were. Nevertheless, the same 
thing occurs with the crook-taloned birds, although 
they lay but few eggs; out of two eggs, one will 
often turn rotten (ourion), and pretty well always one 
out of three. They are hot in their nature, and they 
eause the fluid in the eggs as it were to boil over. 
The yolk and the white, of course, are of an opposite 
nature to each other. Yolk congeals in frosty 
weather,? and becomes fluid when heated ; hence it 

291 

Develop- 
ment during 
incubation. 

753 b 

ARISTOTLE 1/1410 
yn 1) bd Tod éemwalew bypaivera, Kal ‘Towdrov 
ov yiverat Tpodr) Tots ovvierapevors Caous. Trepou- 
5 prevov 6€ Kal d7Tupevov od yiverau ox)npov Sud. TO 
elvat THY diow yeddSes obrws dorep Knpos* “Kal 
dua. ToOTO. Oepwawepeva, paddrov, [eay, qh Hi), x3 
dypod TeEpitTparos, ) Seopodrat Kal yiverat oupta. 
70 5é AcvKdv bro pev TAY Taywv od TiyyvuTat, 
adn’ dypaiverat pLaAAov (70 8 atruov elpyrau mpo- 
TEpov), TUpowpevov d€ yivera orepedv: 810 Kal 

10 TeTTOpevov Tept TH yeveoww TOV Caiwv maxbverat. 

\ 7 oie .) ty 
eK TovUTov yap de Ad TO Céov, TO Exper 

Tpogy) yiwerat, Kat Tois. del guveoTapLevous TOV 

popioy evretler 7) uy) avénos. 16. Kal Subpiorae 7d 

TE Wxpov Kal TO AevKOV. xwpis dpeow OS) €xovTa 
A , a 

Ty pvow €répay. be axpiBetas pev ovr, ov Tpdmov 

15 Exovat TadTA mpos ania Kar’ apxas TE TAS ye- 

veoews Kal cunorap evi TOV Coww, ert de mept TE 
bpuevwv Kal trepl” 6upadrddv, ek Tav ev Tats loroptais 
YEypappeveoy Set Oewpetv: mpos Sé Ty. Tapodaay 
oKepuy iKavov pavepov elvae Tocobrov, OTL Ov- 
oTdons mpwrns THs Kapdias, Kal THs peydAns 

20 hAreBos amd tavrns adopiobeions, dvo0 6udadoi amo 

1 secl. Platt, sed fortasse sanandum: et propter hoe fit 
molle (ueraxdy scribendum pro paAor?) quando. calejit. 
cum ergo acciderit e femigitas ex superfluitate humiditatum 
corrumpetur &. * arepi codd.*; om. Bekker. 

* Aristotle’s observation that the yolk liquefies is quite 
correct. ‘The white loses water, partly by evaporation 
through the shell, and partly to the growing embryo via the 
yolk-sae and the yolk. 

» Perhaps this should be emended to read “ when it is 

292 

. 
; 
; 
k 

g 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. u. 

_ becomes fluid when it is concocted in the earth or by 
_ means of incubation,? and in that condition it becomes 
nourishment for the animals that are taking shape. 
When subjected to fire, or roasted; it does not become 
hard, because it is by its nature earthy in the same 
way that wax is; and that is the reason why, when 
eggs are overheated, [unless they are from a liquid 
residue] they become serous, and turn rotten (ouria). 
The white, on the other hand, does not congeal as a 
result of frost, but tends rather to become fluid (I 
have given the reason earlier) ; and when subjected 
to fire, it becomes solid. This is why, when it is 
concocted in connexion with the generation of the 
young animals, it thickens ; for it is the white out of 
which the animal forms and develops, while the yolk 
becomes nourishment for it, and is the source from 
which the parts as they are formed at the various 
stages derive their growth. That, too, is why the 
yolk and the white are kept distinct and separate 
from each other by membranes, as having a different 
nature from each other. For an exact account of how 
these stand to one another both at the beginning of 
the process of generation and during the process of 
the young animals’ formation, also for an account 
of the membranes and umbilical cords, what is written 
in the Researches ° should be studied ; for our present 
inquiry it is sufficient that thus much should be clear, 
viz., that once the heart has been formed (this comes 
first of all) and the Great Blood-vessel has been 
marked off from it, two umbilical cords extend from . 
“heated, it becomes soft; and so when it is subjected to fluid, 

_ it turns rotten owing to the excess of fluidity ” (cf. 753 a 34, 
above). 

¢ H.A. 561 a 3—562 b 2: but the description there is no 
fuller. 

293 

(ARISTOPUB)!'T Ai TAY 
753 b 
THs prcBos Tetvovow, 6 pev eis Tov Opeva TOV 
TEpiexovTa TO ax pov, 68 Erepos ets TOV’ bpeva 
TOV Xoproed7," és Kido Trepuexer TO lov: €or 
8° obros mepi Tov bueva Tov Tob doTpaxov. bua i 
oby Oarépov AauBaver Thy ek Tod cxpod Tpo 
2570 8 xX pov ylverau Théov- dyporepov yap Piet 
Oepyawopevor, det yap TH Tpopiy gaparodn 
ovoav dypav elvat Kkabdmrep Tos gurois, Hh Se 70 
Tparov Kal Ta €v TOis ots yryvoueva Kal TA ev 
tots Lwots putoo Biov: TO mepunevar yap é TWOS 
happPaver THY T™puTny avénow Kal Tpopyy. 63° 
30 ETEpos oppaddos Tetver cis TO TrEpLEXOV. xdptov. 
det yap drodaBeivy ra WoroKodpeva tav Cawv 
mpos peev TO @Xpov ovrws éxew [rov veotrov |? 
caomep mpos THY payrépa Ta Lworoxodpeva euBpva, 
dray ev TH pntpl'y, émel yap odK extpépovrat ve 
ev TH pnrpt Ta @oToKovpeva, exAapBaver TL [Lepos 
35 avris: mpos dé Tov eLwrdres bpeva Tov aiparady 
754 a os mpos my dorépay. GpLa. be Tept Te TO cyxpov 
Kal TO Xoptov TO avdadoyov TH dorepa TO OOTpAkoV 
TOO wou TepuTepuxer, Oorep dy et TLS mepillet 
TEpl TE TO euBpvov avo aut TEpt THY ENTE po. oAny. 
Exel 5 ovTus, dudTt det 70 euBpvov ev TH voTEpa 
elvau Kal TpOs Th pnTpe. ev bev. obv tois Lwo- 
TOKOUpLEVoLs 7) DATEpa €v TH pnTplLieatw, ev dé ToIs 

! 

or 

1 yopoed7 vulg. * seclusit Sus. 

7 

@ Aristotle’s two umbilical cords here are (1) the yolk-sac 
stalk and (2) the allantois, See figure, p. 369. : 
> See above, 753 b 2, n. 
° Cf. Harvey, “* An egge is, as it were, an exposed womb ; 
wherein there is a substance concluded, as the Representative 
and Substitute or Vicar of the breasts. ‘s ‘ 

294 

— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. u. 

this blood-vessel, one to the membrane which sur- 
rounds the yolk, the other to the chorion-like mem- 
brane which surrounds the animal,on all sides ;_ this 
one goes round inside the membrane-of the shell.* 
Through one of these cords the embryo receives the 
nourishment from the yolk ; and the yolk increases 
in bulk, becoming more fluid as it is heated,® since 
the nourishment, being corporeal, must be avail- 
able in fluid form, just as it must for plants, and the 
embryos that are’ in process of formation, either 
within the egg or within the uterus, are to begin with 
living the life of a’ plant, since their first growth and 
nourishment they obtain through being fastened on 
to something. . The other umbilical. cord. extends to 
the chorion-which surrounds the embryo.. In the 
. ease of the animals that are produced. ovipar- 
ously, we should think of them (a) as having the 
same relationship to the yolk as the viviparously 
formed embryos have to the mother, so long as 
they are within the mother ; for since the nourish- 
ment of the oviparously formed embryos is not 
completed within the mother, when they leave her 
they take. a part of her out with them ; (6) as having 
the same. relationship to the outermost—the. blood- 
like—-membrane as the other embryos have to the 
uterus.’ Also, the eggshell which encloses the yolk 
and the chorion gives the egg an envelope \ana- 
logous to the uterus: it is as though you were to 
envelop both a viviparously produced embryo itself 
and its mother entire.° The reason why this is so is 
that the embryo must be in the uterus, 7.e., in contact 
with the mother. Very well fhen: in the case of the 
viviparously produced animals, the uterus is in the 
mother ; but with the oviparously produced ones 

295 

154 a 

IARISTOPLEO!T AST Aas) 

POTOKOUPLEVOLS avarrad, dorep a ay et ris elton Thy 
unrépa ev 7H borépa loin 76 yap amo ris EN Tpos 
yevopevov [7 Tpop7 |" xe) ox pov, €oTw. airiov 3° Ore 
. 1 extpody odK ev TH pntpe cor. ae: 
10 Adgavopeven be Tporepov 6 oppadds ov ities 
6 mpos TO Xoptor,, dude TaUrp, det TO Cor . € ena, 
70 be Aounov Too expod Kal 6, oudadds 6 ets 70 
eax poy dorepov: dei yap eExew Tpodiy edbds (70 
yevopevor: ovTe yap amd. THs unTpos rerbeverat, 
de adtod te otk edOds Svvarat mopileobar Thy 
15 tpodijv: Sidz7€p evtos cioepxeTas TO @ypov pera 
Tod oppahod, Kal mepupterau | u] vodp§. | vntsthant pe 
Ta pev obv €k Tév Tehetwv @av yuvdpeva Odpale 
Tobrov ylyverau Tov Tporrov emi Te TOV opvibeow 
Kal Tt@v Terpanddwv, 6a Wotokel Td (ov TO 
oK)npodepp.ov. SuddyAa dé Tatra paNdov € éml TOV 
perloveny’ ev yap Tots eAdrroow apa bua pu 
20 KpoTnTa Ta OyKav. earl. 
Wl, "Ere 8 éoriv @oToKoy TO TOV ixOdov, yevos. ue 
Torey d¢ Td. prev EXOVTE, KaTO THY vorépav 
drehes @ov TiKTEL Ova THY mpOTEpov ctpnjLevny 
airiav, Ta de KaAovpeva oehdyn) Tov ixQvwv ev 
25 abrois: pev @oroxet TéAevov wov €&w. de Cworoxel, 
aay évos OV kadobar Bdrpaxov- obros 8 @oroKel 
Aupale TéAevov ov poovos. atria 8.4) Tob oaparos 
dvots TH TE yap kehadjnv troAAamAaciay exer TOO 
Aoirob Gdparos, Kal ratrnv aKavdadn Kai ofddpa 

1 seclusit Sus. 

¢ See 718 b 23. 

» Lophius piscatorius does not conform. to the habits. of 
the Sclachiata because it is not in fact a Selachian ; Aristotle 
wrongly includes it among them. 

296 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1-11. 

itis the other way round—the mother isin the uterus, 
as you: might say, because in this case that which ) 
comes.from the mother [the nourishment) is the yolk. 
The reason is that the embryo’s period of nourishment 
does not reach completion within the mother. 

AS. the embryos grow, the first of the’ umbilical 
cords to collapse is the one which connects to the 
chorion, because that is the point at which the young 
animal will have to make its way out ; the rest of the 
yolk and the cord which connects to it collapse later, — 
because the young animal must have nourishment 
immediately it is hatched, as it is neither nursed by 
its mother nor able immediately to get_nourishment 
by, means of itself. . That is why the yolk goes 
inside. it together with the umbilical cord and the 
flesh grows round it. 

Such is the manner in which ‘animals which’ are 
brought to birth out of perfect eggs are produced in 
the ease of those birds and fishes which lay a hard- 
shelled egg. The points mentioned are tobe seen 
amore clearly in the larger animals ; in the, smaller 
ones they are not so obvious ewing to the small bulk 
of the animals. 

_, Another member of the Ovipara is the tribe of III 
fishes. Gi.) Fishes : 
» Those fishes whose uterus is low down iy, an imper- 
fect egg. The cause of this I have stated previously.* 

‘The Selachian’ fishes as” they are called: produce «a (a) Selachia 
perfect egg internally; though they. are. externally 

Eavipspous; except for one which they call the fishing- 

g°; this is the only one that lays a perfect egg 

xternally. The cause of this is the nature of its 
y- lts head is several times as large as the rest 
its body, and, besides that, spiny and extremely 

3 207 

| ARISTOTLE O) 1 AMD 

754 a cal a 1 / : > 4 
Tpaxeiav: wore’  dvdmep | 00d’. vorepov. etad€exerau 
30 Tods: veorrous;: odd? €& apis CwortoKel” TO yap 
peyeBos Kal 7) tpaxdrns THs Kedadis @orep Kai 
éioeADeiv kahve, etre Kat efeABeiv. “Carel ‘Be 
padaKkddeppov €ort TO @ov 70 TOV oehaydy (od > yap 
Odvayrat ox)npovew Kat Enpatven* 78, repie> be 
Xporepot yap Tov opvibeoy elotv), 70 tov Batpaxwy 
“ov povov orepedy €oTL Kal aTuppov pos. Thy eu 
35 owrnpiav, Ta dé TOY GAAwv' bypa Kat padaa, ov 
754 b pow: oxeTralerat yap cures ios TO Tis 

exovars. ' (<4 . Sinnysiin 

“H 8€ yeveois &k Tob God Tots Te rrpitgots ees 

TeAevoupievors Kal Tots evros uy) abrh, 7 tovros 8 Kal 
Tots TOV opvibeov Th fev opola TH Sé Bude ops 
5 €orw. mparov fev, yap. ovK éxover, Tov Excpov 
opparov Tov €is TO XOpuoy TEWOUTA, 6.€ €oTw, ond TO 
TepueXov doTpaxov, rovtou & alr: Ot TO. mépik 
doTpaKov ovK Exovow" oddev yap adrois XpHotpove 
oKendlet yap n barnp, To 8 dorpardy ‘eat. Tots | 
EKTLKTOMEVOLS ots aewpa mpos Tas ” ‘Oipaber 
PAdBas.. erreB 7 yeveats €f aKpou pév ‘eort TOO 
10 @od Kat TOUTOLS, aad’ odx ul mpoarepuke mpos Thy 
borépay: ot yap, opyibles ek Tob. of€os yivovran, | 
Tavry oe ap 7 TO, wod mpdapuars. airvoy 8 674 
TO pev TOV opvibeay xwpikerar rijs darépas; rTOv Se 
TovovTwy od mavTwv aAAd) TOY mAciorun mpos TH 

1 dare PL: om. vals aie 
2 Kal Enpatver PZ: om. vig. 

ia 
4 

@ In several of the Selachia the young have ‘at habit of 
swimming into the mouth of the parent for shelter. © TI 

298 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. um. 

rough ; so that the reason why it does not take its 
young ones in afterwards ¢ is also the reason why it «| 
does not produce, them aliye.at the outset : just as 
the size and roughness of its head prevents them from 
going in, so also it prevents them from coming out. 
Since, then, the egg of the Selachia has a soft shell 
(because they cannot make the envelope hard and 
solid, being colder:creatures than birds are), the egg 
of the fishing-frog is the only one that.is hard and 
stout, so as to keep it safe in the outside world ; the 
others’ eggs are liquid and soft in nature, because 
they are inside the mother and get their shelter from 
her body. a 

The process of generation out of the egg is the same Develop- 
both forthe fishing-frogs, which are perfected exter- Wept ™° 
nally, and, for, those Selachia. which are perfected - 
internally ; and as between the latter and the birds, 
it is partly similar, partly dissimilar. First of all, they 
lack the second umbilical cord which extends to the 
chorion under the surrounding shell, and the reason 
for this is that they have not got this shell round 
them, as it is no use to them, their shelter being pro- 
vided by the mother ; whereas for eggs that are laid 
externally the shell is there to act as a protection , 
against injury from without.. Secondly, with these, 
as with birds, the process of generation originates 
from the extremity of the egg, though not at the 
place where it is attached to the uterus. A bird’s 
development begins from the pointed end, which is 
the place where the egg was attached, the reason 
being that a bird’s egg becomes separated from the 
uterus, whereas the eggs of most, though not all, 

may be the foundation of this remark; cf. also H.A. 
565 b 24 ff. 
299 

ARISTOTLE 

754 b 
torépa mpooméduKe TO mov téAcvov Cov).* em” 

15 dxpep dé yuyvopevov Tod Cwov Karavadioxerar TO 
wov, dorep Kal emt TOV opvideov Kal TOv doy 
(eavy" Tav amoXchupévwv, Kal tédos mpos TH 
vorEpy 6 ouparos _Tpoomepuce TOV 799 TeAetwy. 
opoiws 8° Exel Kal oowv dmrohehurau Ta Wa THIS 
dorépas® eviows yap avdT@v, drav TéAewov yevnrat TO 
@ov, amoWerat. 

20 *Amopjoeev av obdv tis Sua Ti dvadéepovow at 
yeveoeis Tols Opyviat KaTa TOdTO Kal Tots ixOvow. 
aittov 8 oTe Ta prev TMV dpvilwy Keywpiapevov 
»” ‘ A ‘ \ > / \ \ ~ > v4 
éxet TO AevKOv Kal TO wWypdov, TA dé TaV iyOdwv 
provdxpoa, Kal mdvTn pEpLypevoy TO ToLOdTOV, WaT 
ovbev KwAver e& evavtias exew THY apxyv> od yap 

/ \ A / , > a > ‘ - A 

25 povov Kara Tiv mpoadvaiv eott TowodTov adda Kai 

KaTavTuKpH, Thy de TPOPHY pgdtov’® eAkew ék THIS 
‘ 
doTépas mOpots Tialy. amo radras TAs. dpxiis. 
diAov 8 eri TaV py arroAvopevwy @av: €v* eviots 
yap Tav ocdaydv odK aroAveTas THs borépas TO 
wov, GAN éydpmevov petaywpel KdTw mpds THY 
/ > \ \ ~ A 
30 Cworokiav, év ols tedewHev to C@ov exer Tov 
é oudadrov ex THs voTépas avynAwpevov Tod mod. 
davepov ovdv OTL Kal mpdTEpov ETEWov ot mdpot 
1 <6v) coni. Platt. 
2 (dav) Peck ; cf. infra v. 27 ubi adv om. Z. 

3 pddiov Y, leviter X: paov vulg. 
* & om. Z. 

@ As in the “ smooth dogfish”’; see note on 754 b 34, 
below. 
» Excluding, of course, the statement immediately pre- 

800 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. m1. 

fishes of this class remain attached to the uterus 
even when they are perfect. As the young animal 
develops at the extremity, the egg gets used up 
(just as in the case of birds and the other eggs that 
have been released from the uterus), and at the 
final stage, by which the animal has reached its 
perfect development, the umbilical cord remains 
attached to the uterus. The like ® holds good in 
the case of those Selachia whose eggs have been re- 
leased from the uterus, there being some whose egg 
is released as soon as it is perfected.° 

In view of what has been said, the puzzle may be pitterences 
raised why the processes of generation in birds and $8 between 
fishes differ in this respect. The reason is that in Selachia. 
birds’ eggs the white and the yolk are separate, 
whereas fishes’ eggs are single-coloured, the contents 
being mixed up together throughout, so that there 
is nothing to prevent the “ principle ” in them being 
at the opposite end; the egg is of similar composi- 
tion both at the end where it is fastened and at the 
opposite end, and it is easy for it to draw the nourish- 
ment out of the uterus by means of passages which 
lead from this principle. This can clearly be seen in 
those eggs which do not get released, for in the case 
of some of the Selachia the egg does not get released 
from the uterus, but remains connected as it proceeds 
downwards to produce the young alive. In these 
cases, the young animal, after it has reached its 
perfect development, retains its umbilical cord joined 
to the uterus when the egg has been consumed. Thus 
it is plain that during the earlier stages also, while 

ceding. He means the embryo develops at the extremity. 
The process is similar (‘‘ like ’’), not identical. 
* That of the “ fishing-frog ; but see 754 a 26, n.”’ 

301 

ARISTOTLE) § 45 144 
754 b 

TOD Wod Er dvTos TeEpi eKEtvo mpos THY dorépay. 
totto dé ovpBaiver, Kabdrep elope, ev tots 

yareois Tots Actows. 
Avadéper pev obv 7, yeveaus Kara, TadTa Tov 
35 ixOdav Tois Opvict, Kal bud Tas, etpnpevas airias: 
755 a ta 8’ dda ovpBaiver Tov. avTov Tpomov., TOV TE 
yap, opdanroy € Exouar Tov eTEpov doatrws,, damep 
ot opvibles: mpos TO @xpov, ovrws ot iyOves mpos 
70. Odov @ov (od ydp éorw adrod 70 pev AevKov 
To 8 axpov, GAA. povdypwv Trav), Kal tpepovrat 
5 €k rovrouv, _KaravadvoKopevov Te emepxEeTaL Kal 
Tepupuerau 7) v) caps © Spoiws. > 
Tlepi pev obv Tav év adrois per oroxovvray 
TéA€vov ov Ovpate dé CeworoKxouvrey TOUTOV.. EXEL 
IV rov TpoTrov o) YEVEOIS ot S€é mAcioror Trav aAAwy 
ixyOvwv exrds WotoKodaw, atehés 8 wWov aves 
mAiy Barpayou: mept S€ rodTov TO aiTiov ‘eipyrat 
10 TpOTeEpoy. eipnrar dé Kal mrEpt - TOV bite TiKTov- 
TwY TO aiTLov. Pied 
‘H be yEveots Kal TOUTE 7. pev €x Tod Wood Tov 
avTov ExEt TpOTrOV ovirep Kad TOV ochaxev TOV 
evros @oroKxotvtwr, mAjv H y’ avenow Taxeta Kat 
ek jukp@v, Kal TO EaxaTov TOO Wod oKAnpdrepov. 
157) 5€ Tod Wot avEgnows dpoia Trois oxadAn€v eorw: 
Kal yap Ta okwAjKoroKobvra Tov Cow piKkpov 
drorikrer TO mp@rov, TobTo 8 abtdverat bv adtod 

* The Mustelus laevis. The remarkable desthptiod of 
the placentoid structure in the embryo of this species will be 
found in H.A. 565 b 2 ff. The structure is similar both in 
form and function:to the placenta ofa mammal, although 
its origin is not the same. It was rediscovered by Johannes 

302 

GENERATION: OF ANIMALS, III. m1-v. 

the’ creature’ was still enveloped in the egg, the 
passages extended to the uterus. “This vaape eta = 
havesaid, in the smooth dogfish.* 
I have now mentioned. the respects in absab the 
process jof: generation , of fishes differs. from that of 
birds, and also the causes thereof. Otherwise, they 
both follow the same course. _ The fishes have one 
of the two umbilical cords, just as the birds have (in 
birds it connects with the yolk, in fishes with the 
“entire eg gg, because the fish’s egg is all single-coloured 

and lacks the distinction into white and yolk), and 
they obtain their nourishment by means of this ; as 
it gets consumed the flesh in like manner ‘encroaches 
upon it‘and grows round it. 

-oT have now described the manner of Fortin tiers of 
those: fishes: which produce»a perfect. “Be: internally 
and are: viviparous: externally. 

‘The majority of the remaining fishes are: externally IV 
oviparous ; and all of them except the fishing-frog (Other 
produce an imperfect egg. . The reason for this excep- 
tion I have given earlier.» I have. also given the 
reason why the others produce imperfect eggs.° 

So far as the process of formation is concerned, the 
development from the egg follows the same lines as 
the internally oviparous Selachia, except that they 
start very small and grow very quickly, and the out- 
side of the egg is harder. The growth of the egg is 
like (that of) larvae, for those animals which produce 
larvae produce something small to start with, which 

Miiller m the 19th century (see J. Miiller, Uber den glatten 
Hai des Aristoteles, Berlin, 1842 ; paper read Apr. 1839 
and Aug. 1840). An account of the discovery, with Miiller’s 
letters, is given by W. Haberling, Archiv f. Gesch. der Math., 
der Naturw. und der Technik, 10 (1927), 166-184. 

> At 754 a 26. “" © At 718 b 8. 

303 

755 a 

755 b 

JIL 2&PARISTOTLEY OT ASIKAD 

Kal od dud) mpoaguow, ovdepiav..., 70.8) _alrvov 
TapaAjovov 6 Omép emits copys Kab, yap. Hy Bum 
eK puKkpas peyddn ywerau TOO ev oTepewréepov 
dypawvopevov, Tob) e by pod ‘mvEevwaroupevov. ne 
20 puroupyet 6é TobTO. 1) 700 apoxuKod: Deppod' vats ev 
tots Cébows,” ev 8é rats pats’ 7 4 Tod yvpos Tob 
avyxpabéyros epporns. eh ea . He ssi" 7a 
@a ef. dvayKns pev, bud. tov Th airtay (exe 
yap TepirTapa., Cupa8es),. xdpw 58 tod BeAriov 2v0S* 
ev Tats, voTEepais. yap. aSdvarov “aibrots haupivers 
25 dAny TH avenow bud, Thy, TOV. Lean mohuroxtay 
TovTwy. Oa TobTO yap Kat pukpa TATA drroxpi- 
veTat Kal Taxetav AapBaver Thy,.av Now, pKa, ev 
dia 70 oTevoxoph Ty porépay. elvat pos TO AROS 
tov wor, Tad 8. dmws) py Xpourlovresy  €v 7H 
YEveceL Tept THY avénow pleipnraw TO ‘yevos,: ert 
30 Kal. vOv Ta: OANA POEiperas: tv EKTURTOMEDEOY 
Kunpdroov. Sudmrep mohbyovev ‘€oTt TO: yevos! TO 
rOv ixbdav dvapaxerat yap 7 pois TO” mdiBet 
Tv pbopay. elot d€ TwWeEs ot’ dvap jyvovrat Tay 
ixQbev, olov a ‘xaNoupevn Beddvm, dia. TO peyeBos 

A 

Toy @av- avTy, yap. avTt Tov mOAAd, eye, 1 To 

35 KUyaTa Loxet: Too yap TriBous 7 7), pbous ROP URE 
mpooebyke ™mpos TO peyebos.. 

“Ore. Hey, oby avgdverat Te Kal Be ip. pS a Ta 

TOLAdTA TOV, Wav, €lpyTar. veersrt| Cine desta deal 

{ 

HTICL SAVIB 
i 

1 gots coni. Platt. 

: 
@ Such as an umbilical cord. 
Or “ becoming inflated with: pneuma,” Cf Fea a 19. 
é Lit., “‘of the natural substance of. the soul-heat”. ic 
per iphrasis). 4 Cf. 739 b 23, Ne 
* Cf. H.A, 567 b 23. One of the “ pipe-fishes,” “perhaps 

304 

GENERATION OFANIMALS, III. w. 

by. eure , means, apd tin virtue of any 
attachmen e Shgpedias for. this. is on a par with 
n. vy yest grows. . east, like” these, i is 
small in bulk tO start with abil get¥ Tatwet + thts 
“is due to ts tore said portion turning’ fluid, 
“anid tbe tsk tinning? inte: ypmeuma:?. This) isthe © 
handiwork of the soul-heat ¢in:thé case of animals; of 
the heat of the humour blent with itn the.case of the 
any ‘Eggs thus grow of necessity on,account.of this 
ako the -€.-they fit sae a git ven bet 
) for it is 
‘impc ane for them ie “ob ei fie SEE thy in 
impossbe rus owing to the prolific habit of hee animals. ”' 
That is tat the eggs are “quite small when they are 
discharged’ and why they grow" quickly ¢ they are 
small because, the-uterus is not roomy enough to hold 
so large a number of eggs;.and they-grow quickly to 
prevent, the, destruction .of their, kind-which would 
gnents asa xesult of, their, spendimg.a long time over _, 
e growing period of their formation. Even as it is, 
the majority of the fetations that are laid externally 
get destroyed. That is why the fish tribe is prolific : 
Nature makes good the destruction by sheer weight 
of numbers. ..There are also some. fishes, such as, the 
one known as beloné,? which burst asunder owing to 
the size'of the eggs, the fetations \ this’ fish ‘being - 
large instead of numetous 5 “here” atiire’ has taken 
away from, their number and.added to their, size... 
_ (L-have nowodescribed the’ growth: “ eggs’ bal ae 
sort and: have: ‘stated'the ‘Cause of it, 
S hus. I this g of .w rgai) egozeivo 
ey Fee an his group, (e : is incubates the oats 
me a brood pouch forced by the. pelvic fins. “Aristotle. cor- 

tates at, HA, HOE Git. theta tne sia is pone, the worse 
ig its “bursting asunder,”’; .., 

"$05 

) 0) ARISTOTLE! itAdO 

755 b 
V "Ore & dorokodei Kal obrod’ of tyOves, onpie 

TO Kal Tous CworoKobras tav tyOswv, olov 7a 
aehdxn, WoToKeiVv ev aprots mprov. Bidov yap 
OTL. TO yévos Aov. €ariv, wordxov TO THY ixO wv, 
5 TéAOS HévToL odbev AapBdver TOV. towtrow bar, 
dowry éorl TO pev OipAw: 7o 8 dppev Kal yiyvovrau e& 
oxelas, edv pay: emuppavy 6 dppny tov Oopov. iat 
d€ twes of dacv mdvras elvar rods iyOvas* Ondrcis 
ew TOV oedaydv, ovK dp0ds’ Aéyovres. Bi 
yap Sapepery TOV vopitopeveny appevay Tovs 
10 OjAes_ adrav Gorep TOV purer ev. ogous 70 sie 
Kaprropopet 70 8 dicarpTroy, cor, olov € aia. wai 
KOTWOS KGL ouK Kat <pweos: opolws de Kal. TOUS 
txO6s, Any Toy gedaxav: _ToUToLs yap ovK appuo- 

Bnrotow. Katrou | doavrws Te Sudkewrar of: dp- rs 

peves mepl 7 Bopuca ol Te oehaxdders’ Kal of év 
15 TO yéver TO Tv @oreKwy, Kat Neh aad Kara ob 

1 Kal obrow om.’ Z. Agee: sic SYZ: ix Bos ve 

“ The argument seems to be this. Aristotle | is arg 

from the principle that the production of eggs, if ann 
teristic of any fishes, must be a characteristic of the whole 
tribe of fishes: (cf his enunciation of a similar principle below, 
755 b,36 : it would-be fantastic, he says, if Pr clstinetion of of 
sexes were found in some fishes and not roughout 
whole tribe of them, just as it is found throughout the anes 
tribe of Vivipara. Cf. also'759 b 14 and’ 34). — Nobody, 
however, disputes that, the Selachia, which are fishes, are 
oviparous (internally), nor that they have the distinction of 
sexes. Hence, ea hypothesi, the whole ‘tribe of fishes is ovi- 
parous (though of coursé the eggs are “ imperfect ” ones), 
and has the sexes distinct. Thus the at heey ft ll be 
against those who hold that fish produce not eggs but fava 
(see 757 a 29. ff.), and do not have the deste istinct.' No 

306 

ne 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. v. 
A proof that these. fishes as well as the, others V 

produce eggs is that even the viviparous fishes, such sda stg 
as the Selachia, produce eggs internally at the first Paar 
stage. Why is this a proof? Because? it is plain that ous and do 
the whole of the tribe of fishes is oviparous. At the 20% heve 
same time, no eggs of this sort reach perféction,—+.e., 
eggs of species whére both males and females exist, 
and which are formed ‘as the result of copulation °— 
unless the male sprinkles his genital fluid (milt) upon 
them; though there aré some people who hold— 
incorrectly—that all. fish are female apart from the 
Selachia. - Their view is that the females differ from 
what are reputed to be males in the same way as 
those species of plants in which one tree will bear _ 
fruit and another will bear none (e.g., the olive and © 
oleaster, the fig and caprifig).° They say it is just 
the same with fish; except in the case of the Selachia, 
where they do not dispute the point. Butas a matter 
of fact there isno difference as regards their seminal 
parts between males of the Selachian fishés and males 
which belong to the oviparous group, and semen can 
doubt there were some who maintained that the eggs of 
fishes, which Aristotle holds to be true, though ‘ imperfect,” 

. were on a par with the “ eggs ”’ out of which caterpillars 
and the like developed ; the latter, however, Aristotle holds 
to be “ larvae’ and not true eggs (see 758 b 9. ff.); and 
larvae, of course, are often found in connexion with creatures 
in which (according to Aristotle) the sexes are not distinct and 
are formed without copulation. Thus, the two points on 
which Aristotle insists, (1) that fishes have sexes and copulate, 

and (2) that they produce eggs, not larvae, are mutually 
corroborative. 

® The exception is the erythrinus ; see 741 a 36, n. 

© See above, 715 b 25; also H.A. 557 b 31. “There seems 
to be no similar phenomenon in the case of the olive, but it 
was a common practice to call some trees male and others fe- 
male: see‘Theophr. Hist. plant. 1.8.2, and ef. Soph. Tr. 1196. 

307 

755 b 

ARISTOTLEO 1) #49 

oe 

| Gpav paiverar _appoty ex OABopevov. Exovar de 

Kal dorépas at OxjAevaue eder 8 od povov TOvS 
@otokobvtas aAXG al Tous aAXovs exe HEV, éMa 
diapepovoas TOV WOTOKOUVTWY, [Gomep_ at Tutovor 
ev TO yever TOV _Aodovpa,]* elmrep av Orv 73 

20 YEvOS, mav, add’ drexvol TUES. avTav. vov 8 of 

pev €xovor Oopixd ot 3 dorépas, Kal ev dnaow 
cfm Suoiy, <pvdpivov Kal xdvvns, avrn éotiv 7] 
Svadopd: ot ev yap Bopuca € €xovow, of &° torépas.* 
9 8 dmopia 80 Hv otrws broAapPdvovow, evduTos 
TO ovpBatvov akovoacw. ov0ev yap tav dXEvo- 
pevary TroAAd pace TLKTEL, _Aéyovres opbas: doa. 

25 yap e€ abtav yewa rédeva 7) Lda 7) a, od mrodv- 

TOKE? obrws darmep of WoToKobyTes THY ixOdev: 
amAeTov yp Tt To TOUTWY ThAbos TaY WAV €oTw. 
adrAa Tobro obyi cvvewpdKeoav, Stu ody 6joLO- 
TpoTws Tots THV opviwv exer TA TEPL TA WA TOV 
ixO3wr. of pev yap dpvibles Kal TOV TeTpaTddwr 

30 60a MoToKel, Kal el Twa TOV cehaywd@v, TéXevov 

@ov yevv@ot, Kat od AapBdver efeAOov avéqow" ot 
s ixOves areAj, Kal AapBaver Odpale Ta wa Thy 
avenow. €TL Kat emt TOV padakiwy Tov avrov 
eyel TpoTov Kal emt T@v padaKooTpaKwv, a Kal 

1 haec verba post wes adrdyv transtulit Platt; ego seclusi. 
fortasse plura corrupta. 

2 of pev . . .. borépas secl. A.-W. 
37070 Z: 7 vulg. 

* i.e., those which are in fact males. 

® See note on 777 b 5. 

° Platt transposes these words to follow “‘ of young ” a few 
lines above ;, no doubt they were part of a marginal note on 

308 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. v. 

clearly be seen oozing out from males of both groups 
at the proper season. Also, the females have a 
uterus ; but if the whole tribe of fishes really were 
female, : some of them being unproductive of young,* 
then not only those fishes which lay eggs but all the 
others as well ought to have a uterus, though no 
doubt different in form from that of the ones which 
lay the eggs [like female mules in the class of bushy- 
tailed ” animals].* In fact, however, while some fish 
have a uterus, others have seminal parts, and this 
distinction is found in all species except two, the 
erythrinus and the channa*: some have seminal 
parts, others have an uterus. The puzzle which 
makes people put forward this theory is easily solved 
when we hear what the facts are. These people 
allege—and here they are quite correct—that none 
of the animals which copulate produces many young, 
for of all the animals which generate out of themselves 
either perfect animals or perfect eggs, none is so 
prolific as the oviparous fishes, the number of their 
eggs of course being something enormous. But this 
point they have overlooked: eggs of fishes do not 
behave in precisely the same way as those of birds. 
Birds, oviparous quadrupeds, and any oviparous 
Selachians there may be,* produce a perfect egg, and 
once it has left the parent it grows no further ; fish 
on the other hand produce imperfect eggs, which do 
grow after they have left the parent. Furthermore, 
the same occurs in the case of the Cephalopods and 
Crustacea ; and these creatures can actually be seen 
the word drexvor, but they are meaningless and. irrelevant 
anywhere in the text. 

* For erythrinus see note, 741 a 36; the channa is another 

species of Serranus, probably S. seriba. 
* The fishing-frog ; but see 754 a 26, n. 

309 

ARISTOTLE |!) /.' 4) 

755 b | E Ba . Stages 
ovvovalopeva oparac dud 0 Xpoviov elvau TOV 
35 ovvdvacpov avray: Kaul TOUTWY pavepov €oTt 70 
pev dppev ov, To 8 éyov porépay. dromrov be Kal 
756 a TO }L1) ev Travel Toy yeéver Tavrny clvat my bu 
vap, womrep ev. Tots CwordKous TO pev appev TO 
be OAdv. aitvov d€. Tots éxelvens A€yovor Tis 
ayvotas 70 TAS Suapopas Ta) d7jAas elvan “mavTo- 
Samas ovoas OS TEs Te Tas oxelas TOV Cawy Kal Tas 
5 yeveoes, ddA 6 oAtyen® Gewpobvras oleaBar dein 

EXEL dpotws emt TavTwvV. 

Avo Kal ot Aéyovres Tas Kunoels cladadics 700 
avaKkdamrew 70 omépya Tovs Apres. TOV ixOdev, od 
KATaVEVONKOTES evea. Aéyovow ovrws. bie Tov 
adrov yap Kaupov ot 7° dppeves Tov Bopov, ‘Kat at 
Orjrevar Ta pa EXovet, kal dow av a eyyuTepw 

10 Onreva. Tob TiKTeL, Tore meio, Kal byporepos 0 
Bopos € ev T@ appeve eyyiverau. Kal womep y avenars 
Kata Tov adrov xpdvov Too Dopod € ev TO Gppeve. Kat 
Too @ob ev TH OnArcia., OUT Kal ) ddeois ov Baiver: 
oUTE yap at OnAevat abpoa extikrovat, Daa KaTa 
puKpov, ov@ ot dppeves abpdov adudot tov Bopdov. 

15 Kad Tabra. TavTa cup Baiver Kara, Adyov. BaoTep 
yap kat TO TOV _Opvewy yevos €v eviots toxer 
@a avev oxeias,® oAtya dé Kal dAvyaKis, GAd’ €& 
oxelas Ta TOAAd, Toor avTo ovpBatver Kal €mt TOV 
ixOdav, Hrrov dé. dyova, dé Kal dpporepors ye 

20 vera ra adrépara €av pr) emeppavy 6 dipper, ev 
dois yéeveow abrav Kal TO appev coriv. Tots pev 
ody opvior, dua TO TéAcLa e€véevar TA Wd, ETL EVTOS 

ase 

1 + supplevit Platt. 
2 sic PSYZ*: dAtyou vulg. 
3 dyetas Peck: xujoews vulg. 
310 

GENERATION’! OF ANIMALS, III. v. 

copulating, for with them copulation goes on n for quite 
a long time, and it is plain here/that one is male and 
the other has a uterus,’ “Also, it would he. oe if this 
characteristic? were present in a portion of the grou 
and not in the whole of it, just as ale and female Au 
found in all the Vivipara.. The reason for the ignor- 
ance of. those who fake the statement mentioned is 
that the differences in the copulation and generation 
of the various animals are manifold, but they are not 
instances and think the same’ holds good for a 

So too those who assert that female fishes conceive (2) The 
as a result of swallowing the male's semen have fff" 
failed to notice certain points. Thus in fact milt is 
present in the male and.eggs.in the female at about, 
the same time, and the closer the female is to laying 
the eggs the. more abundant. and. the more fluid 
becomes the .milt in the male. _And just as the 
growth of the milt in the male and that of the egg 
in the female i is simultaneous, so also the emission of 
them both i: is simultaneous : the females do not lay 
all their eggs. at once, but a few at a time, and the 
males do not emit all their milt at once.  Aill this is 
as we should expect. In 'the’bird tribe, eggs are in 
some instances present without impregnation, though 
such eggs are not numerous and they occur but 
seldom, most eggs being the result of impregnation. 
Exactly the same occurs in fish, though to a smaller 
extent. These spontaneous-eggs, both in birds and 
fish, are infertile unless (in those species where there 
are males as well) the male sprinkles them.’ With 
birds, owing to. the fact that the eggs have reached 

* Dynamis, i.¢., the existence ‘of the two sexes, Cf. the 
beginning of ch, 5. 

311 

756 a 

756 b 

30 

5 

! (2A RISTOTURD! TASIARD 

bvrioy dvadeyen TooTO oupPAvar- trois 8° ixOdou Bua 
TO. dredi Kal C27) NapeBavew rp adeno maotw 
Kav ef dxelas VAT OL’ 70° @ov, Opes Ta EEG) Ertp- 
pawopeva® ou) era, kat. evradda dvadioxerat’ 
Dopos Tots. appeow. 5.0 | Kal ovyxaraBaiver edat- 

ivitiine! 

TOULEVOS apa Tots wots Tots ev Tots Oprcow: del yap 

Tois exTUKTopevols ertppalvouat Tapaio ovboavres.. 

Dare a dppeves BEV, Kal Orders. stot, Kal Oxevovrau 
mdures, et pimp ev. TUL yever adiopior dv €oTL 70 py 
Kal TO dppev, Kal) @vev, THS TOO. GRPEROS yovis ou 
yiveran TV TOLOUTwY over. Hi otkae ort oo 02 

LupPadrerat d€ apds THY dencérny abrois Kad 76 
taxdy elvar Tov ovvdvacpov Tav TOLOUTWY ixOvenv, 
wore modovs AavOdvew Kal’ Tv aAvéwv: obbeis 
yap, avr av ovbev THpe Tovdrov Tod: ywovar xdpv’ 
ann’ opis, cpprévos 6 ovrdvacpss ‘€oTw. Tov 
avrov yap Tpomov ot te deAdives 6Xedovrat Tapa 
TImTOVTES KAL OL. x Bbes [ogous <nyy" eurodiler 70 
ovpaior |," dna. TOV. [Lev SeAdiveny Xpoviwrepa 7 
dabanais cot, TOY, 6 ToLoUTENY ixPdor Taxeta. 
du07€p Tabray ody Opa@vTEs, Tas O° dvakda iets, TOO 
Bopod Kab TOV @Ov, Kabob, dAvets. TEpt Tis. Kunoews 
Trav ixOvwy cov <9 sermit AdvQY Kal. vellpudn- 

: locus fortasse, corruptus.. “pro Kal te AapBdvew habent 
ovpBaiverw PSY; pro xay habent ei 4) evtos Y, el kat pe 
evrés PS. fortasse scribendum Bea 70 aTenh. (ebidvauy Kal é&w 
{€or TéXos) AapBdvew <diomrep Kat! ew): eunoe Thy \avénow 
maow, Kal ijevTos? {diore) Kay kta. ..cf, 757 a fin i oye aiheat 

2 <uovov) A.-W,, <udva> Sus,, Btf.; pro «av és oxelas . . . 
odlera. et cum mas eiecerit sperma super ipsa “reign 
virtutem suam et fiunt convenientia generation (= 
yovua) & 3 <u) Platt, ef. H.A. 540 b 10 et 22. 
4 ‘secl. Platt, coll. H.A. loc. cit. 

312 

— . 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. v. 

a perfected state when they are discharged, this 
must happen while they are as yet within the mother ; 
but the eggs of fish, without exception, are imperfect 
when discharged and continue their growth _ after- 

_ wards ; hence, even if the egg has come into being 

as the result of impregnation, still, the ones which’ 

persist’safe and sound are those which get sprinkled 
after they have been discharged ; that is where the 
milt of the males is used up, and that is why it 

_ comes down in smaller quantities at the same time ,., 
_ that the production of eggs by the females dimin- 

ishes, for the males always follow up the eggs and 
sprinkle them as they are laid. , 
; us fish are male and female, and ace copulate, 
all of them (unless there be some species * where the 
sexes are ‘not distinct), and no fish at all of any sort 
comes into being apart from the semen of the male. 
Another point which helps to deceive these people 
is this. Fish of this sort take only a very short 
time over their copulation, with the result that many 
fishermen even never see it happening, for of course 
no fisherman ever watches this sort of thing for the 
sake of pure knowledge. All the same, the copula- 
tion has been observed. The fish copulate in the 
same way as dolphins do, by placing themselves 
alongside of each other [that is, those which are 
(not) hampered by the tail]. Dolphins, however, 
take longer to relieve ° themselves, whereas fish of 
this sort do so quickly. The fishermen do not notice 
this, but they do notice the swallowing of the milt 
and eggs by the female, and so they join the chorus 
and repeat the same old stupid tale that we find told 

* Erythrinus and channa. 
> See note, 718 a 2. 

313 

756 b 

\ARISTOTLE) 6.69) 

peevov, ovmrep Kat ‘Hpddoros 6 poboddyos,. cbs 
KvioKopevay’ TOV ixPdeov eK TOO dvardarew Tov 
Bopdv, ov ovvopavres ott TOOT cory aBivarov. 

yap mopos 6 dia Tod oTparos low els Hi 

10 Kodiav PEpEt, GAN’ odK «is Tas dorépas: Kal. Td 

piev ets THY KotAlay €dOov avd yen Tpodny ylvecBau 

(karamerrerat yap), at 8° dorépar patvovrar: aiojpers 
dav, & 7d0ev etonAder ;} . att tet Nien 

‘Opotws d€ Kal zeEpt Ty TOV Opribeov yeveow 
exe. €lol yap TwEs ot Aeyougt Kad TO. ordpa 

15 plyvvcbau Tos TE Kopaxas Kal Thy (Bur, Kat T@v 

retpardowy tikrew Kata TO oTdua..ThY yadhr. 
~ \ a / tN ~ a A 
Tatra yap Kal "Avataydpas Kal t@v GAAwy Twes 
dvoikdv éyovor, Aiav amA@s kal aoKxéentws Xe- 

\ \ > an 2, 4h > ; ca O08 Che 

yovres, Tept pLev odv TOV opvidwv éx avdAdoyiopiod 
Svazsevddpevor TH THV fev oxelav dAvydKis dpacbar 

20 rv. TOV Kopdkwv, THY Se Tois pUyxeot pos GAAnAG 

Kowwviav ToAAaKis, Nv TavTa ToLEtTaL Ta KOpA- 
Kwon TOV dpvéewv: ShAov S€ TobTo emi Tav TiOa- 
cevojLeveny KoAo@v. To 8 abrto Tobro movet Kat 
TO TOV TEploTEep@v yEvos: rN, dia 7 Kat dxev- 

Opeva. paivertar, Sua. TooTo. TavTHS ov TETUXTKAGL 
25 THs dypns. TO Sé Kopak@des yévos ovK EoTW 

> / ” \ ~ > / > 

adpodiovactikov (€or. yap Tav odvyoydvwv), €m- 
= 2) WS. 2 \ * > , ‘ gai \ ‘ 
Orrat § 7d? Kal Tobro dxyevdmevov. to de dq py 
auMoyilecbat 7s «is Tas doTépas adikvetrat TO 

1 sic interpunx. A.-W.; ¢iofOAev. vulg.; fortasse a 7ofev 
etanAdev. scribendum. 

2 exwnra & 7dn L: eet Sarai y’ 7dy vulg. (ye 57 SY). 
314 

re ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. v.—vt. 

by Herodotus * the fable-teller, to the effect that fish 
conceive by swallowing the milt.. It never. strikes 
them t this. is impossible, but of course it is, 
because the passage whose entrance is through the 
mouth passes down into the stomach, not into the 
uterus, and: whatever. goes down into the stomach 
must of necessity be turned into nourishment, because 
it undergoes concoction. The uterus, however, as 
Bemeeth we raihor eee so we ask, how did they 
find their way there ? f 
It is the-same with the zeae this of biel. Thus VI 
there are those who say that ravens and ibises unite Brroncous 
by the mouth, and that one of the quadrupeds, the about 
weasel, brings forth its young by the mouth: This is, $?Ritg." 
in fact, alleged by Anaxagoras and some of the other ete. 
ph logers ; but, their verdict is based on insuffi- 
cient evidence and inadequate consideration of the 
matter. (1) So far as the birds are concerned, they ‘ 
have reasoned themselves into an erroneous con- 
elusion, since the copulation of ravens is seldom 
witnessed, whereas they are frequently observed 
uniting with each other by their beaks, which is 
something that all birds of the raven family do, as is 
plain for everyone to see in the case of domesticated 
jackdaws. Precisely the same thing is done by birds 
of the pigeon family; but as their copulation is 
plainly observable as well, they have not succeeded 
in. qualifying for the heroes’ part in this amazing 
story. Actually, birds of the raven group are not 
unduly sexual: it is one of the groups that produce 
but few young; still, like other birds, they have 
been observed in the act of copulation. It is odd, 
however, that our friends do not reason out how the 

* Hdt. If. 93. 
\ 315 

756 b 

757 a 

30 

10 

ARISTOTDE“ OTT AA MAD 

oméppa dua Tis Kowlas stenroduns del TO eyywvd- 
fiavee, ett i pHi Tpogiy, aromov, dorépas es 
éxovot Kal Tadrta Ta Opves kat @d datverar pos 
Tots SoG cost Kal 7 peasy prise TaAAa 
verpuron Tov avrov PH ies exer exeivous Tas 
dorépas: e€ dv eis TO oT oe ra ‘aBietras TO 
éuBpvov; GAAd Sid. 7d tlikrew mdpmav juKpa THY 
yaniv, realiarep Kat TaAAa Ta oyild7ro0da, mrept By 
BoTEpov peptic? TH de orpuars mOAAGKIs peTa- 
dhéepew Tovs veotTovs, TAUTHV TmETOInKE Ta (5éEar. 
EdnOixds dé Kal Aiav dvepevopevow: Kat of mept 
a ctcak , ‘ A Ndr > Sri 
Tpoxov Kal daivys déyovres. daci yap THY pev 
of s ‘ A s ¢ , AS / 
Bawav 7oAAol, Tov 5é tpdyov ‘Hpddwpos 6 “Hpa- 
lA 4 > A ” + A , : . ‘ 
KAewTns, dUo aidoia exew, appevos Kat OnAcos, Kat 
Tov pev Tpdxov abrov adbrov dxevetv, er & vawav 
Gavel, Kal oxevecbar igs €ros. @mra. yap 7 
vawa €v €xovaa aidoiov: év €vious yop ToToLs ov 
ondvis THs Oewpias: aA Exovow at vawat do 
\ , © / \ a ~ / > Gy 
Tv KepKov Gpolav ypayprjv TH Tod OyAeos aidoiw. 
éyovor pev odv Kal of dppeves Kal at OxAcvaL TO 
a a 2\)> ¢y/ © » i eee 
TomvToY onetoy, adn’ adickovrat ot Appaues Hii 
Nov: 510 Tots ex mapddov Pewpodor TavTHv emroinge 
Thy do€av. 

* In Bk. IV. 
> This animal cannot be identified. It must be distin: 
guished from the genus now called Trochus, which are shell- 

fish. No species of mammal is normally hermaphrodite. 
© See also H.A. 579 b 15 ff. 

316 

d 

7. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. v1. 

semen manages to pass through the stomach and 
arrive in the uterus, in view of the fact that the 
; ome concocts everything that gets into it, as it 

the nourishment. Besides, these birds have a” 
uterus, just like other birds, and eggs can plainly be 
seen up towards’ the diaphragm. (2) The weasel, 
too, like other quadrupeds, has a uterus of exactly 
the same mae bi as theirs; and how is the _embryo 

: eetes 

in its ee 

» (8), There is. another silly and extremely wrong- 
headed story which is told about the trochos ® and the 
hyena;° to the effect that they haye two pudenda, 
male a | fernale (there are. many who assert this of 
the hyena ; Herodorus of Heraclea @ asserts it of the 
trochos), and that whereas the trochos impregnates 
itself, the hyena mounts and is mounted in alternate 
years.’ In some localities, however, there is ample 
opportunity for inspection, and the hyena has been 
observed to possess one pudendum only ; but hyenas 
have under ..the tail a line similar to the female 
pudendum. | Both male and female ones have this 
mark, but as the males are captured more frequently, 

casual pee bas given rise to this erroneous 
idea.° 

* Heraclea Pontica, a colony of Megara, on the south shore 
of the Black. Sea, about 100 miles east of the Bosporus. |. 
Herodorus (fl. c. 400 B.c.) was the father of the sophist Bryson 
(both are mentioned at H.A. 563 a 7 and 61549). He wrote 
a History of Heracles, which seems to have contained a great 
_ variety of matter. * See add. note, p. 565. 

317 

757 a 

757 b 

‘ARISTOTLE )!'' Aca 

Ada mepl jeep rovrioy dds Ta eipneva. 

VIL [epi 8€ tis Tov ixOvov yeveoews drropriaete av 
15 Tus dua Tia ToTEe aitiavy TOV yey oedax wddv oul 

at Onprcvau.. Td. KUnpaATa. oul” of dappeves drroppai- 

vOvTES, Op@vray Tov Aopev; rn; de yay. Lwordruw 

Kal at OjAcor Ta wa Kal ot \appeves Tov, Popov. 

altiov 8S’ dru To yévos od Tohborreppov OAws 76 

TOV oehaxwddy- Kat ért’ al ye Oiprcvar mpos- TO 

20 Sialapare Tas dorépas exovow. Ta yap appeva 

gih) 

TaV appevwy Kal Ta OyAea TOV. Oijdear* 6 Opotws 
Siadépovar: ddvyoxavarepot yap mpos Thy yori 
ot gedaxeddees ciciv. to 8 dppev YHOS. €v Tots 
pordKors, Kabdrep at OijAevau Tawa dia’ mdVos 
dmorixrovow, odrws eKEvoL dmroppaivovow mrEiw 
25 yap exovar ‘Oopdv 7) cov mpos’ TH dxetay tkapdv- 
LaMov yap Povrerat i) poor Samravay Tov Bopsy 
7pos TO ouvavtew Td. a, Orav amoréKy Or, leva, 
7) mpos Thy ef dpxiis ovoTacw. kabdrrep yap. & 

Te Tos avw Kai Tois imoyvous elpyrae Adyous, Taf 

pev Tav opvéwy wa TeAcobrar évrdés, ta Be TOV 
30 ix Oder exTOs. TpOmov yap Tia €otke Tots oxwXnKo- 
ToKovow: eT yap ‘drehéorepov mpoteTat TO olla 
Ta oxwAnKoroKa Tov Caowv. dudorépors. (be 77) 
TeAciwow Kal Tous TOV opriber, wots, kal Tots oid 
ixOdev Tout TO dppev, GAAa Tois pev TOV épvibew 
evr os (reAeodrau yap evtds),. tots d€ tay. iyOdwv 
35 éxTOs bua TO €€w mpoteoBau dredés, Emel ovpBadrer 
ye em apdhotépwy Tadtov. 
ebitesll 
1 Grn Y. 2 Oitrewv E, Btfe: Opredv vulgy 
318 

. GENERATIATION OF ANIMALS, III. vu. 

» Thaye now Saind-eggs become fertile,? and e- 
With regard to Atenoted by the wWecadirgceiof exstzle 
may be, raised, what, the Cause, can possibly be why 
aetther: . females of Selachian fishes are, seen 

Vil 
Various 
points. 

shedding, (th eir fetations nor the males their milt, . 
m 

whereas the males and females are observed so doing 
in the ‘case ‘of non-viviparous fishes. The reason is 
that in general the class of the Selachians is not rich 
in ‘semén’;' and ‘also in the females the uterus is up 
towards the diaphragm.* Of course males of one class 
differ from, males of ‘another, and females similarly ; 
the fact is that the Selachians yield less: semen 
than most, With the oviparous fishes, the males 
hed their milt, just as the females lay their eggs, 
een there’ is such an abundance of both ;, the 
males have more milt than the amount which suffices 
for copulation, because Nature prefers to éxpend the 
milt in helping to enlarge’the eggs ‘after the female 
has laid them, rather than in constituting the eggs 
at the outset.» This remark is explained by what has 
been said both in-our earlier discussion and also not 
long ago, viz., the eggs of birds are perfected inside 
the parent, but the eggs of fish outside. In a way, 
fish resemble the larva-producing animals, for the 
latter deposit a fetation which is even more imperfect 
still. The perfecting in both cases, birds’ eggs and 
fishes’, is accomplished by the male. With birds this 
is done within the’ parent animal, because a bird’s 
egg is perfected inside ; with fishes, outside, because 
the egg is in an imperfect state when it is deposited 
outside. The upshot however is the same in both 
cases. . 
’ ® And therefore the eggs are brought to perfection inside 
the parent. zh 

319 

757 b 

on 

10 

15 

ARISTOTLE UTAIT ARAVIND 

"AXAG sept jeev rovtwv dds Th eternvepua. plverar 
Ove! 1S ea wpe Adan nrevege” érépov’ yevous TOV 
dippevosv peraBadrer 77 dpvow els Tov vorepov 
oxevovTa’ Kal Ta olkEta dé," dvavéqra® évra ay 
SiaAtarn" TH dxelav, orav dxedon?” md, rout 
Tayetav Aap Save TV avtnow: ov ‘pérrou Kara 
Tavera, TOV xpdvov, ard’ edvmep mporepov yernra, ie . 
oxela Tp petaBaneiv® eis. TH Tod AevKod dad 
Kpiow, Tots d€ Tov ixOdwv odfev wprorar’ ToLod- 
Tov, GAAa mpos TO cwleobar Tayéws émippaivovaw* 
ot dppeves. aitvov 8° 6re od 8ixpoa Tadra: Sidmep 
ovy @plioTa ToLodTos KaLpos ToUTOLS olos emt tov 
dpvibw. tobro bé oopPeBnicey edAdyus Srav yap 
TO Aevkov ddupiopevoy Kal TO @xpov am” aA- 
Andov,, € Exel On THY amo TOD | dppevos Sexy [ets] : 
Tavray yap ovpBadrerat TO appev. Ta. peV ovy 
Darvepia. Aap Baver THY yEeveow HExpt TOU eBexo- 
pevov. advrois. tehewsOijvat pev yap eis Cov 
advvarov (det ‘yap aicbijoews), TH be Opemruchy 
ouvapH THs buyfs €xeu kal Ta On rea Kal 74 arent 

a 

l hic addit © quando femina coierit existentibus illis ovis 
in matrice. 

< OH PSY. fort. ayevpeva | d¢ scribendum, te potius | licot | 
Ta dxeia Sé, av avavé_ #74 wa dia re dvadcimew KrA. | 

avavén LZ: dvavéjcda S et om. dvra. ; 

Seadtary Platt : diarcizn vulg. 
dxevon Platt: dyevO7 vulg.: & éyev07 PSY. 
peraBaneiv P: peraBaddew vulg. a ouviararas Z. 
emppaivovaw Z: daroppaivovow vulg. abies ie 
lacunam hic statuit Platt. . 

10 cis om. S; seclusi: eis rodro coni, A.-W. et per hune 
modum erit conveniencia spermatis maris, &. | fortasse 
aicOnow scribendum, vel <is . . . dppev secludenda. 

320 

CoD > om & 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. vu. 

In birds, wind-eggs become fertile, and eggs Wind-eggs. 
previously impregnated by the treading of one sort 
of cock change their nature to that of the cock which 
treads the hen later ®; and also, where one and the 
_ same cock is concerned,¢ if he has left off treading 
_ the hen and the eggs are not growing on that 
account, he makes them grow quickly when he re- 
sumes the treating. This however cannot happen 
_ at any and every period: the treading must take 
_ place before the change occurs when the white of the 
egg becomes separate. In the case of fishes’ eggs 
there is no such point fixed, but the males sprinkle 
#hem without delay to keep them in sound condi- 
tion. The reason is that fishes’ eggs are not double- 
coloured: that is why in their case there is no such 
fixed time as there is for birds’ eggs. This situation 
is what we should expect, for once the white and the 
yolk have been distinctly separated from each other, 
they already @ possess the principle that comes from 
the male,’ since the male contributes [towards] this. 
Thus wind-eggs attain to generation in so far as it 
is possible for them to do so. It is impossible for 
them to be perfected to the point of producing an 
animal, because sense-perception * is required for 
that ; the nutritive faculty of the Soul, however, is 
possessed by females as well as by males and by all 

a i li 

* Probably there should here be inserted “* if the hen is 
trodden by the male while they are in the uterus.” 

> This is qualified below, 757 b 27 ff. 
© The force of oixeia seems to be that the eggs are the 
_ cock’s “ own ” in the sense that he and not some other cock 
originally impregnated them. But see critical note. 

# And therefore cannot be altered by another cock. 

* See 767 b 17 ff., and references there given in note. 

* Which is supplied by the male. 

M 321 

“7b 

758 a 

ARISTOTLE 

‘ , \ ~ / y 4, 
Kat mdvra 7a Cavra, _kabdzep elpnrau TroAAdKis* 
Oudzrep adro" TO WOV Ws pev purod Kona TEAcvov 

20 €orTw, os de Cqov dredés. el pev ovv [11 evi dppev 

ev TO yevet avrav, eylyver” av domep Kal ert Tov 
ixOdov, etrep eort TL ToLodTOV yevos ofov dvev 
appevos yevvav: etpyrau be mepl adt@v Kal mpo- 
TEpov, OTL ob Tw dara ixavds. vov 8 eorly ev 
maou Tots Opvucr TO pev OAV To 8 dppev, wol? F 

25 pev gurdv, Terehewkev (Svd7rep ov peraBader 7aAw 

peTa THY dxelav),” 7 Sd od purer,” ov TeTeAEwKer, 
ov amoBaiver Be avrod éerepov ovbév- ote yap 
ws dutov amAds ovl? ws C@ov' ex cvovdvacpe 
yéyovev. Ta 8 e& dxelas pev yevoueva wd, dva- 
KEKPULEVe. 5° eis 70 Aevkov, yiverau Kard 70 m™p@rov 

30 6xedoav: exel yap dpuporépas 75 Tas apyds. 

Tov adrov be TpoTrov Kal 7a. paAdicva movetrau 
TOV TOKOV, olov onriat Kal Ta Towabra., Kal Ta. 
padaxdorpaka, olov xdpaBor Kal Ta ovyyevy ToU- 
TOUS" TiKTEL yap ef 0 dxelas Kal Tatra, Kal ovvovalo- 

35 peVvov TO appev TH OrAreu moAAdKis WrraL. Sid7rEep 

ov ictopik@s ovdé TavTn daivovtar A€yovTes ot 
ddoKxovres tovs ixybds mavtas elvar Andres Kal 

1 giro Platt: adrod vulg. 

2 haec verba ad finem cap. transtulit Platt, recte, nisi 
omnino omittenda. 

> quia non sunt animalia X. 

4 dutov .. . Cov Platt: duTrod . . . fwov vulg. 

@ At 741 a 34 ff. 

» Platt transposes these words to the end of the chapter. 

¢ See 731 a 9,'3. 

4 Nutritive soul and sensitive soul, the latter being supplied 
by “ the principle of the male.” 

322 

ie et i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. vi—vin. 

living things, as has been said repeatedly ; hence the 
egg itself, regarded as the fetation of a plant, is 
perfect, but regarded as the fetation of an animal it 
is imperfect. If there were no such thing as a male 
_ in the class of birds, the egg would have been formed 
as it is in fishes, supposing there really is some species 
which generates without a male ; though I mentioned 
_ earlier * in this connexion that this has not yet been 
_ sufficiently observed. Actually, however, both sexes 
_ exist in all species of birds ; so that, qua plant, the 
_ wind-egg has reached perfection (and that is why it 
_ does not change any more after impregnation),” qua 
non-plant, on the other hand, it has not reached per- 
fection, and nothing else results from it, since it has 
_ been formed neither as a plant simply and directly ¢ 
nor as an animal by means of copulation. As for 
_ eggs which are the result of copulation, however, but 
which have”been distinguished into white and yolk, 
these are formed according to the male which impreg- 
nated them first, since by that time they possess both 
_ the required principles.? 
_. The production of their young is accomplished in VIII 
the same manner by the Cephalopods—sepias and {1 Blood. 
_the like—and by the Crustacea—caraboi’ and the (i) Repro- © 
creatures akin to them. They too lay eggs as a rw ala 
result of copulation; many instances have been pods and 
observed of the male uniting with the female. So “™“°* 
_ here we have another score on which we can convict 
_ of a lack of scientific accuracy those who allege that 
_all fish are female and produce eggs without copula- 

_ * At P.A. 683 b 25 Aristotle makes four main groups of 
_ of Crustacea : (1) caraboi, (2) astacoi, (3) carides, (4) carcinoi, 
corresponding roughly to (1) lobsters, (2) crayfish, (3) prawns 

and shrimps, (4) crabs. 

323 

758 a 

ARISTOTLE 

/ e) > > , > A \ a A er > t 
Tiktew ovK €€ dxElas: TO yap Tadra pev e€ dxelas 
otecOau, exeiva dé ale Bavpacror el te TobT 
ehedrfet, onpeiov drretpias. yiverau be 6 ovvdva- 

5 opos TOUTWwY Xpoveairepos mavreu, @orep Tov 
evTopey, evr\dyws avayia yap e€ort, Sudmep voxed 
TV puow. 

Tais pev. odv onmiaus Kat tats tevbior Sto TO. 

wa patverar Sia TO SinpOpGoba tiv sorépay Kal 
/ / \ \ ~ / a OIF 5 
daivecbar Siuxpdav: To S€ Tv troAuTddwv Ev wov, 

w > e \ tA A sO 7 ‘ 
aitvov 8° 7 pop) otpoyytAn tiv idéav odca Kat 

10 ofatpoerdys* 1) yap axiows addnAos mAnpwhetons 
€otiv. diuxpoa d¢ Kal 7) TOv KapaBwv eorlv boTEpa. 
amotixrovot dé TO Kina ateAés Kal Tabra mavTa 
dua THv adriy airiav. Ta pev ody Kapapwon Ta 
OjAea mpos atta Tovetrat Tov TéKOV (Sidzrep u<iCous 
éxyet Tas TAdkas Ta OnAca adrdv 7 Ta dppeva, 

15 dvdakiis xapw tav @a@v), Ta Sé paddkia ew. 

kal tois pev OnAcor THv padakiwy éemuppaiver 6 
appnv, Kabdmep of appeves ixQves Tots ois, Kat 
ylyverar auvexes Kal KoAA@Ses* Tots 5é Kapabude- 
aw ouUT @mTa ToLwodTov ovT evAoyov: bmd TE yap 
TH Ondrela TO. KUNA Kal oKAnpddepyov €oTL, Kal 

20 AapBaver avénow Kal Tadra Kal Ta TOV padakioy 
éfw, kabarep kal ta TOV iyOdwr. 

IIpooréduxe 8’ 1) yuyvonevn onmia trois mois 

\ \ s 8 , \ > Sz , vey 
KATA TO TTPOGUVLOV* TAVUTY) Yap EVOEXETAL [LOVOV exet 

/ \ ‘ 
yap povov emt tavTo TO omtichiov pépos Kal TO 

@ See also 717 a 5 ff. > See 720 b 20. 
324 

copulation, but fish without copulation! Or alterna- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. vm. 

tion. What an extraordinary thing, to hold that 
Cephalopods and Crustacea lay eggs as a result of 

tively, if they were not already aware that the other 
creatures copulate, then it just shows how ignorant 
they are. The copulation of all these creatures takes 

_ quite a long time, just as that of insects does, which 
is not surprising, because they are bloodless, and 
_ therefore cold in their nature. 

In the sepias and calamaries the eggs appear to be 

two in number, because the uterus is divided and 
_ appears to be double. The octopuses appear to have 
_a single egg; the reason is that the shape of the 

uterus is round and spherical in form, and when it is 
full the cleavage is not obvious.* The caraboi also 

_have a double uterus. All these animals as well 
_ deposit the fetation in an imperfect condition, and 
_ for the same cause. Females of the caraboid group 

deposit their eggs on to themselves; that is why 
they have larger flaps than the males—in order to 
protect the eggs; the Cephalopods lay their eggs 
clear of themselves. The male Cephalopods sprinkle 
their milt over the females, just as male fishes do 

over the eggs, and it becomes a glutinous mass. 
_ Nothing of the kind has been observed to occur with 

the caraboids, nor should we expect it, because the 

_ fetation is situated under the female and is hard= 

skinned, and both these eggs and those of the Cepha- 
lopods pursue their growth after they have left the 

parent, just as the eggs of fishes do. 

The sepia while in process of formation is fastened 
to the egg by its front part, which is the only possible 

place, because its front and back parts face in the 
‘same direction ° (in this respect it is unique). Fora . 

325 

ARISTOTLE ©» [ty 

758 a 
mpoatior. To d€ oxjpa Tis bécews dv Exeu yuyve~ 

25 eva Tpérrov, dei Oewpetv ex Tav toropidv. 
Tlepi pey obv tTav dAdwv fpr THS yevéoews 
IX elpnra, kat melOv Kal mrnvav Kal mAwrav: epi 
d€ TOV evTopwv Kai TV dorpaKodéppiov NexTéov © 
KaTa T7V donynwermy pebodov. eimwpev be mp arioe dy 
Tept TOV nih gtd 
30. “Ort bev otv Ta pev e€ O oxelas ylverau TOV Tot 
ovtrwv Ta 8° abropara, mporepov €AéxOn, mpos de ~ 
TovTois OTe okwAnKoToKel Kal dia Tiv’ airiav 
~ ‘ A ” / . Jf 
aokwAnkoToKel. oaxedov yap €ouke mdvTa TpoTrOV 
TWa okwAnKoTOKEly TO’ mpHTov- TO yap dredéora~ 
Tov KUNA ToLoUTOV eoTW, ev maou Se Kal Tots Cwo- 
35 ToKObGL Kal Tots WoTOKODaL TéAcLOY ov TO KUHUA 
\ ~ > 7 nv / \ ” 
TO mp@tov adidprotov dv AapBdver riv avEnow- 
, me LY ¢ ~ / r , ; P §e 
to.avTn 8 eatly 7 ToD oKw@AnKos PUois. peta BE 
~ a > 
TOOTO Ta peV WMoTOKE. TO KUNA TEAcLov, TA O 
758 b aterés, €€w Sé ylyverar TéActov, Kabdmep emi TOV 
> 4 ” 4 \ > > ¢ a 
ixOvwv elipnrar todAaKis. Ta 5° ev adrots Cworo- 
KobvTa TpoTOV TIWa PETA TO GVOTHUA TO €€ apyis 
iret hie 
@oewdées yiverat: mepiexeTar yap TO bypov bpeve 
Aenr@, Kkabdamep av el Tus—apenor TO TOV WOv 
5 GoTpakov: S10 Kal Kadodor Tas TOTE hie eas 
TOV KUN Larow plopas exptoeis. 
Ta & évrowa Kal yerva Ta yervOvta oxwdAnxas, 
‘ \ Lé \ > > / > > b] . ae ? 
Kal Ta yuyvopeva pun du’ oxelas aAX’ adTopaTa ex 
TouavTys ylyveTar mp@tov ovordcews. det yap 

: 176 PZ: om. vulg. 
326 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. vut1-—tx. 

figure showing the way in which it is situated during 

the process of formation, the Researches * should be 

consulted. 

We have now spoken about the generation of the 
_ animals that walk, fly and swim. Following the IX 
_ plan we have laid down, there remain the Insects 
_ and the Testacea to be discussed. We will deal with 
_ the Insects first. : 

I said earlier that some Insects are formed by Gi.) Repro- 
means of copulation, others spontaneously ; further, ener 
that they produce a larva, and I stated the cause of 
their so doing. In a way, it looks as though practi- 
cally all animals produce a larva to begin with, for 
the fetation in its most imperfect state is something 
of this sort; and in all the Vivipara and all the 
Ovipara that produce a perfect egg, the fetation in — 
__ its earliest stage is still undifferentiated and is grow- 

_ ing, and this is just the sort of thing a larva is. At 
the next step, some of the Ovipara produce their 
fetation as a perfect egg, some as an imperfect one 
which reaches its perfection after it has left the 
parent, as I have often stated with regard to fish. 
In the case of the internally viviparous animals, the 
fetation, after it has been constituted at the outset, 
in a way becomes egglike : its fluid content becomes 
enclosed in a fine membrane—like an egg with its 
shell taken off—and that is why a fetation aborted 
at this stage is known as an “ efflux.””? 

Those Insects which generate, generate larvae ; (a) Larvae. 
and those Insects also which are formed spontane- 
ously and not by means of copulation are, to begin 

_ with, formed from an organism of this sort. This is’ 

* See H.A. 550 a 10 ff. 
> Of. H.A. 583 b 12. 

CO 

327 

ARISTOTLE 

758 b 
Kal Tas Kdptras «dds Te TiWévar oxw@AnKos, Kal 

ai: pe path iheg , , te a. 1 IEE Be 
10 Ta THY apaxviov. Katror ddevev av ois eouxevar 
dia THY TOD oyTHpaTos Trepip€perav Kai TovTwWY Evia. 
Kal ToAAa THv dAAwy: GAN od TO oxHpate Aektéov 
224 a ; \ , \ \ 
ovde TH padakdTyT. Kat oKAnpoTnTt (Kal yap 
okAnpa Ta KUjpata ylyverar eviwv) adAAd TO GAov 
/ ‘ \ > / ‘ / A 
petaBaAAew Kai pt) €k popiov Twos yivecBar To 
15 (Gov. mpoedAPdvra S€ mavTa Ta oKwAnKwdyH Kal 
Tod peyéDovs AaBdvra réAos ofov wov yiyverat’ 
, , \ \ et. \ : Rear 
okAnpuvetat Te yap mept atta To KéAvdos, Kal 
akwnrilovet Kata Tobrov Tov Katpov. SfAov de 

a a a ‘ ety 
totto év Tots aoxwAnk. trois TOv pedittav Kal 
a ‘ a , , aie cy € 
ofnk@v Kal Tats Kdpmais. tovtov 8° aitiov ort 
4 © ‘ \ ” > tal \ \ 
20 vos WOTTEPAaVEL TPO WPAaS WOTOKEL dua THY 
wt tig \ co a € * ~ ¢ ” > 
atéAcav THY adTIs, Ws OvTos TOD GKw@ANnKOS ETL EV 
2e Ts > A a \ isa \ , ; \ 
avéyoe wWod padakod. tov atrov d€ Tpdmov Kat 
a= ¢ ~ 4 / / ~ \2 > > rf 
emi TOv GAAwy ovpPaiver mavTwv TOV pn? e€ dxelas 
"4 > rds ” »” / A 
yryvopevwy ev €piois 7 Traw aAAous ToLvovTos, Kat 
~ a / \ x ‘ \ tp 
T@V ev Tois VdacW. TavTa yap peTa THY TOO 
& 7 > /, ‘ ~ / 
25 okwWAnKos vow aKwyTticavTa, Kal Tod KeAddous 
: 7 / ¢ /, 
mepienpavOevtos, peta Tatta TovTov payevTos 
~ ~ > A ae 
e€épyetar Kabdmep €€ wod C@ov émiredcobev emi 

17 P: om. vulg. 2 uy om. PSZ. 

¢ This apparently means the eggs from which they are 
328 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. 1x. 

correct, for we are bound to reckon caterpillars * and 
the product of spiders as a form of larva. True, some 
of these, and many belonging to other Insects, would 
appear to resemble eggs on account of their circular 
shape ; but our decision must not be determined by 
their shape nor yet by their softness or hardness (the 

_ fetations of some of these creatures are hard), but by 

the fact that the whole of the object undergoes change 
—the animal is formed out of the whole of it and not 
some part of it.” All these larva-like objects, when 
they have advanced and reached their full size, 
become as it were an egg: the shell around them 

_ gets hard, and they remain motionless during this 

period. This is clearly to be seen with the larvae of 
bees and wasps, and with caterpillars. The reason 
for this is that their Nature, owing to its own imper- 
fection, deposits the eggs as it were before their time, 
which suggests that the larva, while it is yet in 
growth, is a soft egg. A comparable thing occurs in 
the case of all other creatures which are formed 
independently of copulation in wool® and other such 
material and in water. All of these first have the 
nature of a larva, then they remain motionless once 
the covering has solidified round them ; after that the 
covering bursts and there emerges, as from an egg, 
an animal which, at this its third genesis,‘ is at last 

produced. Aristotle however calls them larvae, and not eggs, 
at this stage, because according to him the stage which really 
corresponds to the egg-stage is not reached until later, when 
the creature becomes immobilized as a “‘ pupa.” 

® The distinction which Aristotle makes here is an import- 
ant one. See note on 732 a 32. 

© See H.A. 557 b 2; the dustier your clothes are, the more 
moths’are produced. 

4 The stages are: larva, pupa, imago. 

329 

ARISTOTLE 

THs Tpityns VEvevews” dv ta [dciora}. irvepeorre, 
Tav melOv (uellw) eoriv. 
Kara Adyov dé ovpBaiver Kai To Oavpacbev av 
‘s 4 ‘ ~- 7 A /, / 
ducatws imo ToAA@v, at Te yap Kdprrar AapBa- 
30 vovoat TO mp@tov Ttpodiyy peta Tatra ovKETL 
/ > > > ‘ e , 
AapBdvovow, GAN dkwnyrilovow ai Kadovpevar 
¢ ‘ U ‘ ~ ~ € / 
bo Twwv xpvoadXibes, Kal TOV ognKav ot oKw- 
Ankes Kat TOV pedutTav pera Tabra at RGACUE SEE 
vippas yivovras, [Kat Towodrov oddev €xovow | kat 
yap TOV wav dvows drav AdBy téNos, dvavérs 
35 €oTl, TO 5€ mp@rov advédverar Kai AapBaver tpodyy, 
o ” ~ ‘ / / 77 A 
ews av diopicbA Kal yévntras TéAciov @dv. TAav de 
oKWAnKwY Ob fev Exovol ev EavTOois TO TOLODTOV 
/ 
759 a bev tpepopevois emiylyverar [towdrov|* mepit- 
4 ~ ~ \ ~ ¢ 
Twa, olov ot* t&v peditt@v Kai aodynk@v: of be 
AapBavover Ovpabev, womep al Te KdpTraL Kal TOV 
aAAwy tives oKayhi Kam. : 
Avére pev obv Tpuyevi Te ylyveTaL TA rowira, 
Kat de hv airiay ek Kwovpevwy axwnyriler madw, 
Belpnrar’ ylyverau b€ Ta prev e€& oyelas adrav, 
Kabdmep ot te opviles Kal ta CwordoKa Kal TOV 
> 7, ¢ a \ > ° / /, ” 
ixQdwv ot mAcioTo1, Ta 8° adropara, Kabamep eva 
Tav dvopevwv. 

1 correxi (cf. 763 a 23). &X vertit et volatilia ex eis sunt 
maiora quam ambulantia. 

2 ante haec verba lacunam plurimorum vv. statuit Platt - 
(rpodiv pro tovodrov coni. A.-W., cf. 759 a 1); ego seclusi; 
fort. transferenda ad 759 a 1-2 et ita scribendum of de odde 
Tovodrov Exovow (aAAa) AapBavovow xrA. cf. infra 763 a 12 sqq. 

330 

- 

_- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. rx. 

perfected. Of these creatures, the winged ones are 
larger than those that walk. 

_ Another occurrence, which may well cause surprise 
to many people, is really quite regular and normal. 
Caterpillars at first take nourishment, but afterwards 
they cease doing so, the chrysalis (as some call it) 
being motionless; so too the larvae of wasps and 
bees afterwards turn into pupae as they are called 
{and have nothing of the sort]. This is not abnormal, 
for an egg also, when it has reached the perfection of 
its nature, does not grow, whereas to begin with © 
it does grow and takes nourishment, until its 
differentiation is effected and it has become a 

perfect egg. Some larvae contain in themselves 

material from which as they feed on it residue is 

_ produced,* e.g., those of bees and wasps; others get 
the material from without, as caterpillars and some 

other larvae do. 

I have now stated why it is that it takes a threefold 
generation ° to produce creatures of this sort, and the 
cause which, after they have begun as mobile crea- 
tures, makes them become immobile again. Also, 
some of them are formed in consequence of copula- 

__ tion, just as birds, Vivipara and the majority of fishes 
are; others are formed spontaneously, as certain 
_ plants ° are. 

* Cf. H.A. 551 a 29 ff. “the larvae of bees . . . and 

} wasps, while they are young, take nourishment and are seen 
_ to have excrement ” ; cf. also ibid. a 25. 

> See above, 758 a 28 et praeced. 
© ¢.g., the mistletoe, 715 b 28. 

7 om. Z: rovodro 7 tp0d7 S: habent in se id quo cibantur 

| et eiciunt superfluitatem cibi =. 

4 olov ot Peck (sieut Z): of re vulg. 
331 

759 a 

ARISTOTLE TAAN HAO 

X ‘H 6€ Ov pedirrdv yéveots éxev TAA astopiav: 
; ~~ 7. ae < 
elmep' ydp eat. Kal mepl Tods tyis TovavTy ms 
pty KD CO POH 
10 yeveois eviwy wor dvev dxelas yevvav, TobTo 
cupPaivew €ouKe Kai mepl Tas pcAitTas eK TOV 
/ 2s ‘ ” y =a ae 
pawvonevwv. avdykn yap arow dépew adras 
> , ‘ re 7 . ‘ , toNve svurast 
adAdbev tov yovov, wortep twés daor, Kat ‘TooTov 
7 pvdmevov adréuarov 7 aAAov twos Caov Tik- 
*” ~ eae, * \ Zz UAE AREAS 
TovTos, 7) yevvay adtas, 7 Tov pev Pépew Tov de 
15 yervdy (kal yap todto Adyouvai twes, Ws TOV TOV 
Kndjvav pdvav épovot ydvor), Kal’ yervav 7 — 
oxXevopievas 7} avoxetrous, Kal dxevopévas yevvav 
y ’ 7 Lat i ty ty 
nro exaaTov yevos Kal” aire } ev Te adrav Tada 
7 ovvdvaldopuevoy dAdo yévos adAw, Aéyw 8 ofov 
peXrras pev yiyverar ex pedutra@v avvdvalo- 
t a 24 > / \ A 3 f A” 
20 pevwv, Knpivas 8 ex Kyndyvwv Kal Ttods BactAeis 
ex Tv BaciAdwr, ) mavra TaAAa e€ Evos otov €K 
Tav KaAoupevwv Baciréwy Kal yyepovwy, 7) eK TOV 
Kndyvwy Kal TOV peditTa@v: hac yap Twes TOUS 

1 cimep Z: énei vulg. 

* The facts about bees, so far as they are known, are these. 
There are three sorts of bees : (1) the Queen, which is a fully 
developed female; (2) the worker, which is a_ partially 
developed female ; and (3) the drone, whichis a male, Eg 
are laid by the Queen, and it is generally agreed that the 
unfertilized eggs produce drones and the fertilized eggs 
Queens or workers. When a hive becomes over-populated, 
‘““swarming ” takes place, and after the colony has settled 
down in its new home, the Queen takes the “ marriage flight,” 
followed by a number of males ; copulation takes place in 
mid-air, and the Queen returns to the nest. At the end of 
the summer the drones are ejected by the workers. Queens 

332 

‘GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

_ The generation of bees is a great* puzzle. If it X 
is a fact that certain fishes are generated without ®°* 
copulation, the same probably occurs among bees as 
well—or so it seems from appearances. The pos- 
sible methods are these: Bees must either (a) fetch 
the offspring ® from elsewhere (some hold this view) ; 
in which case the offspring will either have sprung 
into being spontaneously or have been produced by 
some other animal ; or (6) generate the young them- 
selves ; or (ec) fetch some and generate some (this, 
too, is a view held by certain people, who maintain 
that the young of the drones only are fetched). If 
they generate the young themselves, this must be 
done either with or without copulation; if with 
copulation, then either (i) each kind generates its 
own kind,° or (ii) one of the three kinds generates the 
others, or (iii) one kind unites with another kind. 
What I mean is, e.g., either (i) “ bees ” are formed 
from the union of “ bees,” drones from the union 
of drones, kings from the union of kings ; or (ii) all 
the rest are generated by one kind only : e.g., by the 
kings or leaders as they are called; or (iii) by the 

union of drones and “ bees ” (some people of course 

and workers are produced from similar eggs, though the 
queen-cells are larger; but the larva of a Queen is fed on 
“royal jelly ” (a special food produced by the workers) 
throughout its development, whereas those of workers are 
fed on this for a short time (3 or 4 days) only, and for the 
remainder of the time on honey and digested pollen. It is 
thought that in rare cases the workers may produce Queens 
and other workers from unfertilized . A ‘worker’s 
_ development is completed in 3 weeks ; a Gueehi's in 16 days 
~ and a drone’s in 24 days. 

® The larvae. 

¢ The three “kinds” are: “kings” or “leaders.” (i.e., 
queens) ; “* bees ” (i.e., workers) ; and drones. 

333 

759 a 

759 b 

ARISTOTLE hh) 

prev dppevas elvae Tous dé Ores, of Sé* Tas prev 
peAitras dppevas Tovs de Kndhvas O7Aeas. 

25 Tatra & €or ravra advvara ovMoyiLopevors Ta 

pev ex TOV ovpBawovray idia mepi Tas peirras, 
Ta 8 €k T&Y KoworTépwv Tots aAAows Cwors. TE 
yap p17) Tixtovaa. dépovow aAdobev, eu ylyvecOat 
peXirras Kal pn depovodv trav pedurr@v ev Tots 
tomois €€ dv’ TO aéppa pépovow. bia ri yap 

30 perevexPevros pev E€orat, Exel 8’ odK EoTaL; mpoo- 

HKet yap ovdev Arrov, cite ghudpevov ev Tots 
avOeow avTouarov €lTE C@ov Twos TIKTOVTOS. Kav 
et ye Caov Twos éTEpou TO o7reppa. HV, éxeivo edet 
ylyveobau e€ avtod, adda. 41) HeHie ne ere S€é To 
pev peru Kopilew evAoyov (spo) yap),° To d€ TOV 

35 yovov ehAdrpror dvTa Kal pr Tpodyv arotov. 

Tivos yap xdpw;* mavrTa yap doa mpaypareverat 
mepl Ta TéKva, Tepl Tov Pawdpevov oixetov Sdia- 
TovetTal yovov. 

"AAAa pv odde Tas pev peAritras Andr«Eias ivan 
‘rovs d€ Kypivas appevas evAoyov: oddevi yap TO 
mpos aAknv dmAov Tav OnrcLHv arodibiwow 1 

7 > 8” e A ~ »” ¢c be 
dvots, eiot ot pev Kndjves akevrpor, at dé 

5 méeAurTaL Taca KévTpov Exovow. ovde TovVaYTIOV 
evAoyov, Tas pwev peAitTas appevas Tods 5é KndHvas 
OyAcus®- oddev yap T&Vv appévwr eiwle dvaTrovetabar 
mepl Ta TéeKva, vov 8’ ai pedutrau TobTO movodow. 
o > > \ / c A ~ ¢ / 
dAws 8° ezred7) haiverar 6 pev TOV KHdHVwWY yovos 

1 of 8€ PSYZ: ofov vulg. 
2 &y Tots Tomas e€ wv L: ex Tod Tomov ef od vulg, 

3 zpodr) yap om. SY. 4 zivos yap xapw om. SZ. 
® Ayres P: Ondctas SZ: OjAeas vulg. 

334 

a a 

—_— 

ae oo a 

OO ee a a oe 

= 

4 
“a 

oe. ae 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

_ say that drones are male and “ bees ” female ; others 
that “ bees ’ are male and drones female). 

We have only to bring before our minds the special 
and particular facts concerning bees, on the one side, 
and on the other the facts more generally applicable 
to other animals, to see that all of these theories are 
_ impossible. Suppose they do not generate offspring 
themselves but fetch them from elsewhere. In that 
_ case bees ought to be formed, even if the,bees failed 
to fetch them away, in those places whence they 
fetch the seed (semen). For why should a bee be pro- 
duced if the seed is fetched away, and not if it is left 
where itis? Surely it ought to be produced none the 
_ less, no matter whether it springs spontaneously to 
_ life in the blossoms or whether some animal generates 
it. Also, if the seed were that of some other animal, 

_ then that animal ought to be formed out of it, and 

_ not bees. Further, it is reasonable enough that bees 
_ should collect honey, for honey is their food ; but it 
_ is absurd that they should collect offspring which (a) 
is produced by some animal other than themselves, 
and (6) is not food. After all, why should they? 
All creatures which concern themselves about young 
_ ones take that trouble over what appears to them to 
__ be their own proper offspring. 

' Nor is it reasonable to hold that “‘ bees ”’ are female 
and drones male ; because Nature does not assign 
_ defensive weapons to any female creature ; yet while 
_ drones are without a sting, all “ bees” have one. 
_ Nor is the converse view reasonable, that ‘‘ bees ”’ are 
_ male and drones female, because no male creatures 
make a habit of taking trouble over their young, 
whereas in fact “ bees’ do. But generally, since it 
_ is apparent that the brood of the drones is produced 

335 

ARISTOTLE 

759 b ee, \ se a ‘ egy on 
eyywopevos Kat pnfevos dvtos Kndivos, 6 b€ TaV 

10 peAitTav obK eyywopevos dvev THv Baciréwv (810 
Kat gaci Twes Tov TaV Kndyvwv dépecbar pdvor), 
d7Aov ws odk* €€ dxeias yivovrat, ovr’ €& Exatrépov 

~ tA > ~ fe - ,-  S > 
Tod yévous adrod att@ ovvdvalopevov, ovr ek 
A \ , , a phot as 
pedit7TOv Kai Kndyvwv. Td TE ToOTOV Pépew povov 
dud Te TA,elpnueva advvatov, Kal odK eUAOyoV }41) 

15 TWepl wav TO yévos adTa@v spoiv te ovpPaivew 

mdBos. aAda pry odd’ atras tas peAittas €v- 

déyeras Tas pev appevas elvar Tas dé OndAEias* ev 
mao. yap Siadeper tots yeveow TO OAAV Kal TO 

+ a“ > / > \ e / ~ 8° > lA 
dppev. Kav eyévvwy avtal attds: viv 8 od dai- 
veTal ‘yuyvopevos 6 yovos adT@v, e€av pt) Ev@ow ot 
€ , © / ‘ A ria | \ A > 
20 Hyyeoves, ws gaciv. Kowdv 5€ Kal mpos THY €& 
> / / ‘ A \ > ~ ta 
aAAjAwy yéveow Kal mpos THY eK TOV KHdHVwV, 
Kal xwpis Kal pet aAAjAwY, TO pndémoTe HPOat 
> 7 \ 7 A > > > 3 a A A 
dxevopmevov pnbev abrdv: «i. 8 Hv ev adbrois TO pev 
OjAv to 8 dppev, modAAdKis av todro ovveBatvev. 
- Xr / 8’ ” 2€ > / / \ B tr a 
eletas 8’, eimep €€ dyelas ylyverat, Tods Paowrets 
25 yevvav ovvdvalopevous. add oi Kndives Paivovrat — 
” 
yryvopevor Kal pn evdvTwy yye“ovwv, Bv ovTE 
. dépew oidv Te Tov yovov Tas pedAiTTas ovTE yevvay — 
a > lA / p>) / 0 / is 
adras dyevopevas. Aeizera 54, kabdrep haiverar 

1 otk Z: ovr’ vulg. 

* Cf. above, 755 b 3, n. 
336 

i in el 
in oe = 

Si, Rill nae 

OS ae a es es 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

even when there is no drone present to start with, 
whereas young “bees” are produced only if the kings 
are present (and this is why some people say that the 
brood of the drones are the only ones they fetch 
from away), it is plain that they are not formed as a 
result of copulation, either (1) of “ bee ” with “ bee ” 
or drone with drone, or (2) of “ bee” with drone. 
And anyway, not only is it impossible that drones 
are the only ones they fetch in, for the reasons stated, 
but also it is unreasonable to suppose that a similar 
thing does not happen in respect of the whole tribe 
of them.* Again, it is impossible that some of the 
* bees themselves ” should be male and some female, 
since in all kinds of animals the male and the female 
are different. And besides, if it were so, “‘ bees ”’ by 
themselves would generate “ bees,”’ but in actual fact 
we see that the brood of “‘ bees”’ is not formed unless, 
as they say, “the kings are within.” And here is a 
point which strikes at either theory (that they are 
produced (a) by the union of “bees” with one 
another, and (6) by their union with the drones, 7.e., 
by one kind apart from the other, or by the two kinds 
together with one another): none of them has ever 
been seen in the act of copulation, whereas if there 
had been male and female among them this would 
often be occurring. The remaining possibility, assum- 
ing that they are generated by means of copulation at — 
all, is that the kings unite and so generate them. 
But, as against this, the drones, as we see, are formed 
even if no “leaders”’ are “ within”; and as it is im- 

ible that the “bees” should either fetch in 
the brood of drones from away or generate them by 
copulation themselves,’ plainly the only possibility 

> Proved already. 
337 

759 b 

760 a 

ARISTOTLE 

a > F > tA ‘ , ” 
aupPaivoy emi twwy ixOdwv, tas peditras dvev 
> / a ~ ~ ~ 
oxelas yevvay tos Kndhvas, TH pev yevvay ovoas 

30 Onrcias, exovcas 8 ev abrais, domep Ta puta, Kat 

nn 

10 

To OAAv Kal TO dppev, 610 Kal Td mpos Thy aAKiy 
Exovow Opyavov: od yap det OAV eaiely ©, @ 
dppev a €OTL KEXWpLopEevov. 

Ei 8 exit t&v xngivev TOTO faivera ovpBatvor 
Kat yuyvopevor pn e€ oxelas, 4On Kal KaTa TOV 

5 mehitT@v Kat THv Bacwdwy tov adrov avayKatov 

/ \ \ cod 2 > , Dittery 
elvat Adyov Kai pu) yevvdoOar e€ dyeias. «t pev 
Ss ” ~ , > 7 > > /, c 
otv avev tav Baorléwv edaiver’ eyywopevos oO 
yovos TOv pelitT@v, Kav Tas peAitTas avayKatov 
> > € ~ wv > 7 / 0. ~ 8 > \ 
hv e€ adtav dvev oyxeias yiyveoOar. viv d° ened) 
~ 4 a“ 
Totr ov dacw oi epi THv Oepareiav todtwv TOV 

a \ 
Caiwv ovres, Aelwetar tods Baoreis Kai adrovs 
yevvay Kal Tas peAirras. 
” \1 ~ lon / \ du ~ ~ 
Ovtos 57)' mepittob Tod yévous Kat idiov TOD TAY 
~ ~ / 
peditT@v, Kal 7 yéveois adr@v dios elvor faiverar. 
~ ww 
TO ev yap yevvav tas peditras dvev dyeias ein av 
~ ‘ A 
kat én” GAAwy Caiwv ovpBatvov, aAAa To pq TO” 
avTo yévos yevvay diov- of yap epubpivor yervOow 
> 
epulpivovs Kat ai yavvar yavvas. aitiov 8 ort 
7 e 
Kal avral yevv@vrar at peéAutrar ody WoTEp at 
~ A bs ~ ~ VA > > > e / 
pviar Kal Ta TowadTa Tov Cawv, addr €€ érépov 

: 3 Rackham : de vulg. 
2 76 wy To corr. Z: 76 ya) P: pa) ro vulg. 

* ¢.9., erythrinus and channa (below, 760 a 9); see slic 
762 b 23, and H.A. 569 a 17, 570 a 2 (cestreus and eel). 

>. See above, 759 b 4. They are as much male as female ; 
hence it is not irregular for them to possess a sting. 

338 

ee ———— 

i iis 

~~ oe 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

remaining is something parallel to what we find 
_ occurs in certain fishes *: the “ bees” generate the 
drones without copulation, i.e., although so far as 
generating is concerned they are female, yet they 
contain in themselves the male as well as the female 
(factor), just as plants do; and this also is why they 
possess the organ for self-defence,? for of course it is 
_ wrong to apply the term “female” to creatures 
_ where no separate male exists. 
___ We find then that this is what occurs in the case of 
_ the drones : they are formed independently of copula- 
_ tion. And if this is so, then surely the same argu- 
ment must apply to the “bees” and the kings ; 
_ they too must be generated independently of copu- 
lation. Now if we were sure that the brood of the 
_ “bees” made their appearance without the kings 
_ being there, then it would follow of necessity that 
_ the “ bees ” as well as the drones are produced from 
_ “bees” without copulation. This however is denied 
_ by those whose business it is to look after these 
creatures. Hence the only possibility left is that 
the kings generate their own kind and the “ bees” 
as well. 
_ We see then that the manner in which bees are 
' generated appears to be peculiar, in keeping with 
_ their extraordinary and peculiar character. Bees’ 
generating without copulation might be paralleled 
by the behaviour of other animals, but their generat- 
_ ing some different kind of creature is peculiar and 
unique, for even erythrinot and channae generate 
creatures of the same kind as themselves. The 
_ reason is that the “ bees themselves ”’ are not gener- 
_ ated in the same way as flies and other such creatures, 

_ but from a kind which though different is akin to 
339 

ARISTOTLE)! ¢0'" 

760 a 
peev ovyyevovs dé “yevous: ylyvovrat yap ex TOV 

Tye Hoven. dud Kal éxet dvdoyov TWS 7 yeveots 
avray- Tot pev yap ayEpoves peyeBer pev dpovot 
elou Tots KN PHC, T@ d€ Kevtpov €- exe rats ped ir- 
15 Tais* at pev obv pedurrae Kara TOUT’ coikaow 
avrois, ot b€ Kndives Kara, TO péyebos’] dvdyKn 
yap Te tapadAdrrew, €f Ha det del TO adTo yévos 
e€ éxdotov yivecOa. totto 8 advvarov: may. yap 
av TO yevos NyEpLoves Hoar. at jev obv pedurras 
Kata tiv Sdvapuv adrois dpoiwvrat [kat 7a” 
20 Tikrew |, oi be Knives Kara TO péyeos: [et Ss 
elyov Kal KevTpov, Tiyepoves: av joav. viv d€ Todo 
Acimerat? Tis dmopias*: ot yap Tyepoves ddorepous 
€oikacw €v T@ avT@ Tols yeveor, TO ev KevTpov 
éyew Tats pedirras, T@ S€ peyeVer trois Knpjow.|’ 
avaykatov d€ Kal Tods tyyenovas yiveoBar Ex Twos. 
25 eel odv ovT ex Tav pedtTTaV ovr eK TOV 
Kn pTVov, avrois dvayKatoy Kat adrovs yevvay. 
[ytvovras 8 emt téAx ot KUTTapot abTr@v Kal od 
moAAot Tov apiOudv.|® wore ovpPaiver Tods pev 

. 1 in seqq. plurima irrepsisse videntur. af pév odv . 
péyeBos om. &. 
76 Y : tod coni. A.-W.; Kai 7@ rixrew seclusi. 
2 \éAvras coni. Platt. 4 
* hic addit Y kai 7 Aéhuraue 7a ppbietphpibve yap 7 sick 
THs damopias. 
5 secl. A.-W. 6 haec verba hic aliena. 

* The full explanation of this statement comes at ll. 27 ff. 
below, but owing to a number of interpolations in the text the | 
clarity of the passage has become obscured. The dvadoyia is: 

Kings can generate two kinds, their own and anothies 

(viz., kings and *‘ bees *’); 

340 

~~ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

them—they are, of course, generated from the 
“ leaders.””. Hence their manner of generation is 
in fact arranged in a sort of proportionate series *; 
thus, the leaders are similar to the drones in size, 
ut similar to the “bees” in possessing a sting ; 
therefore the “‘ bees” are similar to them in this 

respect, but the drones are similar to them in size,] 
_ for of course the three kinds must of necessity fail to 
coincide in some respect, unless the same kind is 
always going to be bound to be generated from each, 

and this is impossible, because then the whole tribe 
of them would be “ leaders.”’. Therefore the “ bees ” 

_ have been made similar to them in respect of char- 
_ acteristic properties.” [7.e., in virtue of generating 

- young, ] while the drones have been made similar to 

Se a 

them in respect of size [and if they had a sting as 

_well, they would be “leaders.” As it is, this portion 

_ of the puzzle remains, since the leaders resemble 
_ both kinds at the same time, the bees in possessing 
_ a sting, the drones in size.]* But the leaders too 
_ must be generated from something ; and since they 
are generated neither from the bees nor from the 
_ drones, they must of necessity generate their own 
_kind as well. [And their cells are the last to be 
_ formed, and are not many in number.}? So it turns 

“* Bees” can generate one kind, i.¢., a kind other than 
their own (viz., drones) ; 
Drones can generate no kind. This is the wépas of the 

dvadoyia (see 760 a 33). 
» Dynamis: referring to the special and distinctive char- 

_ acteristic, viz., ability to generate, as the gloss explains. 

© I have tentatively bracketed the passages which seem to 

_ have been interpolated. The main argument is about the 

a 

power to generate, not about size or sting. 
# This sentence seems to have been misplaced ; it is more 

releyant if moved to 760 b 27 below. 

541 

760 a 

760 b 

30 

35 

10 

ARISTOTLE $f Se 

Hyewovas yevvay pev Kal adrovs, yevvav Se Kal 

aAXo te yévos (robTo 8 éeotl To TV pehirray), Tas 
de pechirras GAAo pév Te yevvay, Tovs Kndjvas, 
abras dé pnwere yervay, ana Toor’ adnpicbar 
abtav. eel d° det TO KaTa pow € exet rdew, dua 
TobTO Tav Kydyvev dvayrcatov Kat To dAdo TL 
yevos yevvay adnphobar. Omep Kal daiverar ovp- 
Baivov: avrot bev yap yiyvovrat, do oe ovfley 
yervaow, GAN’ ev TO Tpit apie mépas €axev 
u} yeveais. Kal ovTw 3) ovveornke Th pvoer Karas 
wor aiet Suapevew évTa Ta yévn Kal pndev éA- 
Neimew, pq) TAavTwV yerveavrenv. [evAoyov de ie 
ToUTo ovpPaivew, ev pev Tats evernpiats peru kat 
Kneyvas yiveoOau ToMous, ev O¢€ Talis eropBpiars 
oAws yovov moAvy. at pev yap dypornres mepir- 
Twa ToLobat mAciov €v Tots cwpace TOV TIYEHOVOOY, 
ai 5S’ ederynpia ev tots TOV peAitTa@v: EharTw yap 
évra' T@ peyeBer Seirar THs evernpias wGAdrov.|? «d 
dé Kal TO ods Baothets woTrep TeTrounpLevous emt 
TEKVWOW €ow evel, dperrevovs TOV avayicatoy 
épywv, Kal peyeBos dé EXE, Bomrep emt TeKVO- 
Touav auotavtos Tob awpatos atta@v: tovs TE 
Kndavas apyovs ar ovdev éxovtas SmAov mpos TO 
SiapayeoOar mepi THs Tpodis, Kai dia THY Bpadv- 
THTa THY TOO oWpatos. [at de peAuTrar pea” TO 
péyebds eiow apdotv (xpjoyat* yap odtw mpds THY 

1 eharrw yap ovra P: €Xarrov yap év vulg. 2 aliena hic. 

* Hetous coni. Btf.; 70 wéyeos del. Sus. 

4 ypjoa P: xpyjoor vulg. 

« This passage also seems to be out of place. 
342 

Ve 

: 

2 OE ST OT, SI a a ey ae a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

out that the leaders generate their own kind, and 
another kind as well (viz., the “ bees ’’); while the 
“ bees ” generate another kind (the drones), but zot 
their own kind; this they have been deprived of 
doing. And since any business of Nature’s always 
has an orderly arrangement, on that account necessity 
requires that the drones shall have been deprived 
even of generating some other kind. And this is 
what is found to be the case in actual fact: they 
are generated themselves, but generate no other 
creature ; thus the progression of generation reaches 
its limit at the third term of the series. And this 
arrangement has been so well constituted by Nature 
that the three kinds continue ever in existence and 
none of them fails, though not all of them generate. 
[Another point about them, which is in accord with 
what we should expect, is this. In fine seasons, much 
honey and a large number of drones is produced, in 
rainy seasons a large number of offspring generally. 
The reason is that wet conditions produce more 

. residue in the bodies of the leaders, whereas fine 

seasons do the same in those of the bees, for being 
smaller in size they have greater need of fine 
weather.|* Besides, it is well that the kings, who 
have, as it were, been made specially for the purpose 
of procreation, should stay within, released from the 
drudgery that has got to be done by somebody ; 
and that they should be large, since their body has 
been constituted as it were for procreation, and that 
the drones should be idle, as they have no weapon 
for engaging in combat to secure their food, and also 
on account of the slowness of their bodies. [The 
bees, however, are as regards size midway between 
the two, for thus they are serviceable for active work, 

343 

760 b 

15 

20 

25 

30 

ARISTOTLE 

epyaciay), Kal epydtides ws Kal Téxva tpedovaat 
‘ , 1 € , ov! 9 Vi Ba 
Kat Tarépas.|' dpodoyovpevov 8° éotl Kal TO ém- 
axodovbeiv trois Bacwedou TH THhv yéveow ex TOv- 
Twv elvar THY TOV peAiTTAV (Et yap punbev ToLodToVv 
dmipxev, odK elye Aeyov Ta. cup Patvovre mept ray 
HyEpoviav avr ay), Kal TO Tods ev edv pnbev € ef: 
yalonevovs oi ws yoveis, tovs d€ Kndivas KONE RE ws 
Téxva* KdAMov yap Ta TéKVa KoAdLEew Kat dv unbev 
€oTw epyov. Td dé Tas peditTas yevvav moAAds 
, 

adrovs ovtas dAliyous Tods ryendovas TrapamAjovov 
coke ovpPaivew TH yeveoes TH THY AedvTWwY, Ot 
TO TpO@rov Téevte yevvnoavtes YoTepov eAdtTw yev- 

~ \ / o > LANA ¢ 2) ait / \ 
v@ou Kat téAos ev, clr’ oddév. of 8° ayepdves TO 

\ ~ ARO a 8 AC c 4 
fev mp@tov mAA00s, totrepov 8 dXrtyous atrovs, 
kakelvwv” ev eAdtTw Tov yovov, atta@v 8 eémet 
Tob. T7AjOous adeire, TO°® péeyebos adtots* amédwxev 
7 pais. 

"Ek pev ody rod Aéeyou Ta Tepl iid yéveou TOV 
pekittav tobrov éyew daiverat tov tpdmov, Kal 
ex TOV ovpPaivew SoxovvTwy Tepi avtds* ov pV 
Ww / \ La € ~ > + RS pe 
ciAnnrat ye TA GupPaivovra, tkavas, add’ édv tote 
a / ~ > / ~ ~ / 

Andb4, TéTE TH aicOyjoe waAdAov Tav Adywv morTev- 

a monent corrupta esse A.-W.: pro T™pos THV . . « 
matépas creationi pullorum & (=mpos tiv réxvwow). unde 
et credo leg. esse v. 17 (ras pedirras) tots Baciredou . . . [rH 
TOV peherrav). 

5 KaKetvor PS. 3 adetre 70] adethero YZ. 

it” adrots ne 

° atrovs . . . dvais] quoniam diminuuntur superfluitates 

que sunt in corpore X. 
344 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x. 

and they are workers inasmuch as they support and 
feed their children and fathers alike.]}¢ Other facts 
which fit in well are these : (a) the bees attend upon 
the kings—because the bees are generated from the 
kings ; since, if nothing of this kind were the case, 
the facts about their leadership would be lacking in 
reason ; (5) they allow the leaders to do no work, as 
being their parents, and they punish the drones, 
_as being their children, because it is a finer thing 
_ to punish children and those who have no function to 
perform.” The fact that the leaders, though few 
themselves in number, generate a large number of 
bees looks like a parallel phenomenon to the genera- 
tion of lions. Lions * to begin with generate five, 
then fewer, finally one, then none at all. The 
“leaders ’”’ generate a multitude to begin with, and 
later on a few—these are of their own kind,’ and 
though the brood of these is smaller in number, 
_ Nature, because she has taken away from their 
numbers makes up for it by giving them more in 
the way of size. 

This, then, appears to be the state of affairs with 
regard to the generation of bees, so far as theory can 
_ take us, supplemented by what are thought to be the 

facts about their behaviour. But the facts have not 
been sufficiently ascertained ; and if at any future 
time they are ascertained, then credence must be 
_ given to the direct evidence of the senses more than 

* Part of this sentence is inconsistent with what has 
already been said about the comparative sizes of the three 
_ kinds, and part anticipates what is to be said in the next 
sentence. 

* I suppose attention should be called to this statement. 

© See 750 a 31 ff. 

* The statement at 760 a 26 above seems relevant here. 

345 

fn 

eae « 

<_- 

are ee aa) 

Wr 

ARISTOTLE 

760 b 
Téov, Kal Tots Adyous, eav dpodAoyovpmeva Secvdwor 

Tots Pawvopevors. 

[Tpos dé TO pu) €& oyelas yiveoBat onpciov Ka 

TO Tov yovov daivecBar piKpov ev Tots TOD Knpiov 

35 KuTTaptots’ doa 8° e& dyelas THY evTouwy yevvarat, 

61a ovvdvaletar prev moAdv xpdvov, TikTer S€ Taxews 
Kal péyebos exov axwAnkoedés.|* 

Tlepi dé riv yéveow tiv T&v ovyyevav Cawv 
abratis, olov avOpnvav te Kai odynk@v, tpdmov Tw’ 
exer TapatrAnciws maow, adypyrar dé TO mepirTov 

5 edAdyws: od} yap exovow odfev Oeiov, wamep TO 
yEevos TO TOV pedirray. yervor pev yap at 
Hijrpae KaAovpevar, Kal Ta mpara ovpmAdrrovat 
TOV Knpiwv, Oxevomevau dé yerv@ow br” dMijrwv: 
dara. yap modAdKis 6 6 ouvdvacpos avTov. mooas 
oo exovar Svadopas 7 7 mpos adAnAa tav Tovodrwy 

10 yev@v Exaorov 2) 7pos Tas peXrras, ex TOV epi 
Tas toropias avayeypaypevwr Set Oewpeiv. 

Kai epi pev Tv evTdpwv Tis yeveoews eipnrat 
TavTwr, Tept d€ TOV doTpaKodéppwy AeKTéov. 

xI “Exeu 5€ Kai trovtwy ta mepl Thy yeveow TH bev 
15 dpotws TH S ody Opoiws Tots dAAois. Kal TOOT’ 
evAdyws cvupBaiver: mpos pev yap Ta laa gutois 
€oikact, mpos d€ Ta duTa Caos, WoTEe TpdTOV [EV 
Twa amo oneppatos paiveoBar ywopeva, Tpdtrov & 
aAdov ovK amo omépuatos, Kal TH pev avdropara 

1 haec non proprio loco sita. 

* The most important principle announced in this para- 
graph deserves very special attention. 
» This is another misplaced paragraph. 

346 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x.-x1. 

to theories,—and to theories too provided that the re- 
sults which they show agree with what is observed.* 
- [Another piece of evidence which goes to show 
_ that bees are generated without copulation is that 
the brood appears to be quite small in the cells of the 
: comb, whereas those insects which are generated by 
_ means of copulation (a) spend a long time in inter- 
_ course, and (6) quickly bring forth their offspring, 

_ which is of the nature of a larva and of considerable 
size.] ° 

With regard to the generation of the animals that Hornets 
are akin to bees, such as hornets and wasps,° the nad wasps. 
situation is in a way similar in all of them, but the 
extraordinary features are lacking, and this is what 
we should expect, because they contain no divine 
ingredient as the tribe of bees does. Although the 
“ mother-wasps ”’ as they are called do indeed gener- 
ate, and mould the first of the cells, it is by copulation 
with one another that they generate, as their copula- 
tion has often been observed. To find out the various 
differences between each of these kinds of creatures, 
and between them and bees, the records given in the 
Researches * should be studied. 

We have now described the generation of all the 
Insects, and we have next to describe the Testacea. 

The circumstances of the generation of these XI 
- animals also is to some extent similar, to some extent ae ee 
dissimilar, to those of the others. And this is what Testacea. 
we should expect, for compared with animals, they 
resemble plants, compared with plants, they re- 
semble animals, so that in a way it seems that they 
are generated from semen, but in another way not ; 

© See H.A. 627 b 23 ff., 628 b 32 ff. 
2 At H.A., loce. cit. 

347 

761 a 

761 b 

. 

ARISTOTLE! 1) .50te 

TH S ag? abdtOv, 7) Ta pev ovres | Ta 8” exetvors. 

20 dua Sé 7d Tots gurots dvriorpodov €. exew Thy dvow, 
Sia Tobro ev pev TH Yh tev dorpaxodéppnv odbev 
H _pucpov Tt ylyverau yévos, olov TO TOV koyhav 
Kav 7 Tt TowodTov Erepov pev omdvuov dé, € ev d€ TH 
Daddrry Kal Tots dpolows bypots, : TroAAd, Kal mavTo- 
Samy € €xovra popdyv. 76 Se tav durav yévos év 

25 pev Th Baddrrn Kal Tots. TOLOUTOLS* peucpov Kat 
mdyurray wos etreiv oder, ev d€ TH YH Ta {Towatra 
yiveran TavTa: THY yap dow dvddoyov € EXEL; Kat 
dueornKev, oow” Correxedtepov TO bypov TOO Enpod 
Kal vis” BSwp, Tooobrov 7 TOV ooTpak éppoy 
dvots Tis TOV puTav, emrel BodArcrat ye Os Ta 

30 pura Tpos THY via, otrws exe TO GoTpaKddepj.a. 
mpos TO dypov, Ws OvTa Ta peev dura dorrep 
doTpea xepoaia, Ta d€ doTpea wWomepavel pura 
evvdpa. 

Ava Towavrny 5 airlay Kal Tod poppa 7 év T® 
byp@ paadrdv éorr Tov ev TH va TO TE yap dypov 
eUmrAaoTorépay € EXEL THV piow THS yas Kal fis vill 

35 KV ov TOME Prrov, Kal pddvora Ta ev TH O 
Toadra: TO pev yap morysov yAvKD pev Kat 
mrorapois Z. 2 gow 8¢ PSY. 

1 

2 The scheme which Aristotle has in mind is ; 

Place: Earth Water Air 

Creature: Plants Testacea Land-animals. 
(From the passage 761 b 16-23 (see n., p. 352) we may add 
a fourth pair, Fire, and Moon-animals; but it is not essential 
to Aristotle’s main argument, and Aristotle himself does not 
seem too sure of the existence of such creatures.) Aristotle 
holds that water supports life better than earth (I. 27); and 
also that the more “ perfect ’’ animals are those which breathe, 
i.e., which live in the air (see 732 b 28 ff.); hence the three 

348 

- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x1. 

and in one sense that they are spontaneously gener- 
ated, in another that they are generated from them- 
selves, or some by the one method, some by the 
other. In virtue of the Testacea being in their 
nature the correlative of plants,* no part, or only a 
small part, of this tribe comes into being in the earth 
(examples are snails, and any such species there may 
be besides, but there are not many), whereas many 
species, of all kinds of shapes, live in the sea and 
similar watery places. The plant tribe, on the other 
hand, makes very little show—practically none at all, 
in fact—in the sea and such places, but-all members 
of this tribe grow in the earth. The reason is that 
in respect of their nature the two tribes stand in 
a correlative position ®: the nature of Testacea is 
removed from that of plants by an interval corre- 
sponding to that by which water and fluid matter are 
__ better able to support life than earth and solid matter, 
- since Testacea aim at being so related to the water 
as plants are related to the earth: it is as though 
plants were a sort of land-shellfish, and shellfish a sort 
of water-plant. 

And it is for some such cause as this that the things 
which grow in the water are more various in shape 
than those which grow in the earth. It is because 
a fluid substance is in its nature more plastic than 
earth, and not much less substantial ; and this is a 
characteristic possessed to a marked degree by the 
creatures in the sea, since fresh water, though sweet 

stages are in order of increasing “‘ perfection.”” We thus 
get the dvadoyia (1. 27): 
Testacea : Water : : Plants : Earth, or 
Testacea : Plants : : Water : Earth. 
® Or, “* proportionate relationship.” 

349 

Various 
animals 
proper to 
various - 
Elements. 

761 b 

5 

10 

ARISTOTLE |i) ):i 44 

TPOPtHov irrov dé owparddes Kal puxpov eoTw. 
Stomrep doa dvayia Kat pr) Oepud tiv poow, ve 
yierat ev tats Aiuvais odd€ TOV ddvpav ev Tots 
ToT mur épous GAN’ Ayrrov, olov Ta dorpaxddeppa ) 
Kal Ta paAdicca kal Ta padaxdorpaxa (wdvro, yap 
avayia Kal puypa ratra Wid pvow goriv), év dé 
Tats Apvobahdrrais Kal mpos Tais éxBolais TOV 
Totapav yivovrau: Cntodar yap dua tiv 7° dAcav 
‘ \ / ¢€ A / € / Ns 
Kal THY Tpodyv, % dé OdAatTa bypa Te Kal ow- 
parwdns 7oAAG paGAAov tod motipov Kai Depp 
Thv dvow ori, Kal KexowdvnKke TdavTwY TaV 
~ ~ , ‘ : 
Hopiwy, bypod Kal mvevpatos Kal ys, woTe Kal 
TdvTwv peTéxew TOV Kal? ExacTov ywopévwy [ev 
a t , 1 \ \ \ \ ’ ” 
Tois Toros Cawv).’ ra ev yap puta Gein tis av 
~ 55 \ A \ \ \ , \ 
yijs, Udatos S€ ta Evvdpa, Ta 5€ mela depos: TO 
A ~ \ @ 2 4 \ 4 
dé waAAov Kal #rrov Kal éyy’TEepov Kal ToppwTepov 
\ in \ \ 7 2 1 Oo. 
ToAAnv movet Kal Oavpaoriy diadopav.2 To dé 
Téraptov yévos ovK emi TovUTwy TaVv ToTwY Set 
1 seclusit Platt, dere cai . . . Cwv om. &. 

2 haec sensu carere monet Platt. post TOppwrepov addit Z 
de? 710€van, et pro zrovet PZ habent zoveiy. 

* Aristotle apparently did much of his zoological work in 
lakes and lagoons; he refers to the lake at Siphae, P.A. 
696 a6, 7.A. 708 a5, H.A, 504 b 32. The difference between 
a lake and a lagoon, as distinguished in the present passage, 
is that the former is fresh, the latter salt. For lagoons ef. 
H.A. 598 a 20; the whole passage is apposite. Cf. also 
763 a 29, 763 b 2. 

» It is now known that the blood serum (the fluid part of 
the blood remaining after the cellular portion has been 
removed by clotting) of both sea- and land-vertebrates has 

350 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IIT. x1. 

(palatable) and nutritious, is less substantial and is 
cold. Hence, those animals which are bloodless and 
not hot by nature are not produced in lakes nor in. 

_ the fresher of brackish waters, except to a somewhat 

small extent—such as the Testacea, Cephalopods and 
Crustacea, all of which are bloodless and cold by 
nature—whereas in lagoons * and near the mouths of 
rivers they are produced.” The reason is that they 

_ seek both warmth and food together ; and sea-water 

is fluid and much more substantial than fresh water 
and it is hot by nature,° and it contains a quota of 
all the parts “—of fluid, of pneuma, and of earth—so 

_ that it also contains a quota of all the creatures which 

grow in each of them, because we may say that plants 
belong to the earth, aquatic creatures to the water, 
and land-animals to the air, but the more and less and 
nearer and further make a surprisingly great differ- 

ence.’ As for the fourth tribe, we must not look for Fire- 
animals, 

a composition closely approximating to that of sea-water, 
which suggests that all vertebrates originated in the sea; 
and this receives support from comparative anatomical and 
embryological studies. Anaximander had asserted that 
human beings originated in fishes; see Plut. Symp. viii. 8. 4, 
P. 730 © & ixOvow eyyevécbar 76 mp&rov avOpwmous . . . womTep 
oi yaAcoi [waAaioi Mss.| (see note, 754 b 32). 

© The rest of the paragraph from this point is obscure, 
and other passages do not help much in its elucidation. For 
eer theory of the structure of the universe, see App. A 
§§ 2 ff. 

* As Platt says, the sea 

ae 

shares’ in all three, earth, 

water, and air: it is fluid; it is cwparixév, and so contains 

earthy matter; and it has pneuma in it, being warm—for 
mvedpa is ““ hot air” (736 a 1), and also, as Aristotle says at 
762 a 19 ff., the things which are produced spontaneously 
in water are produced mainly in virtue of the pneuma in it, 
which contains Soul. 

© It is difficult to attach any meaning to this statement. 

351 

ARISTOTLE 

761 b cal / 4, / , A \ los ‘ 
(ynreiv: Kaitou BovAeral yé te Kata THY TOD TUpOS 
elvar T&Ew* Tobro yap TerapTov aprOpeirou TOV 
owpareov. adda TO peev Top del Paiverar THY 

20 popdiy ouK iSiav EXOV, dA’ ev érépw TOV ow 
pear: vy) yap arp 7, Kamvos oh vq paiverat TO 
TETUPU|LEVOY. ddrAa 6 et To ToLovTov ‘yéevos Cyrety 
emt THS oehnvns atrn yap paiverar Kowwvodoa 
THs Terdprys a amooTdcews. aAAd mepi pev TOUTWY 
adAXos av ein Adyos. 

‘H d€ t&v dotpaxodépywv ovviorara dvois TOV 

25 wev adtoudtws, eviwy d€ mpoicewevwy twa Svvapuv 
ad’ attav, moAAdkis 5€ ywopevwy Kal TovTwWY a7O 
ovotdcews adtoparns. Set 517)’ AaPetv ras yevéoets 
Tas TOV duTa@v. TovTwy yap yiverar TA fev amo 
onéppatos, Ta 8 amo omapaypatwy amoduTevo- 
peeve, éva d€ TO trapaPAaordvew, olov To Tv 

30 Kpopptev yévos. TodToVv pev obv ot pes yivovrat 
Tov TpdTov: Tapadvovta yap €AdrTous del Tapa 

1 81) Peck, coll. 762 b 6: de vulg. : 

* According to Aristotle, the ‘‘ heavens’ and the heavenly 
bodies were composed of the “ fifth element,” aither, whose 
natural movement is circular (see 736 b 35 ff. and n., 
and App. A §2). As fire is the outermost of the sublunary 
elements and is therefore in contact with the “heaven ” 
which is nearest to the earth, and as this “ heaven ”’ carries 
the moon, it follows that the moon can be said to “ have a 
share in the fourth degree of remove,” viz., fire. Aither 
must be clearly distinguished from fire; and, according to 
G.A. 737 a1 (ef. Meteor. 382 a 7), fire generates no animal, 
whereas aither, the ‘“‘ element of the stars,” is a form of 
Geppov which can produce living creatures (moe? yovpa 
7a onépnara; see 736 b 30-35). But at H.A. 552 b 10 
Aristotle speaks of a creature which is engendered in the 
fire in places where ore is smelted; and also mentions 

352 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x1. 

it in these regions, although there wants to be a kind 
corresponding to the position of fire * in the series, 
since fire is reckoned as the fourth of the corporeal 
substances. But always, as we see, the shape and 
appearance which fire has is not its own; on the 
contrary, fire is always in some other one of the sub- 
stances, for the object which is on fire appears either 
as air or smoke or earth.2 No; this fourth tribe must 
be looked for on the moon, since the moon, as it 
appears, has a share’in the fourth degree of remove. 
However, these matters should form the subject of 
another treatise. 

With regard to the Testacea,° then : some of them (@) Side- 
take shape spontaneously, others by means of the eet st 
emission of some special substance from themselves, 
though these too are often formed from a sponta- 
neous composition. We must here apprehend the 
ways in which plants are generated. Some plants 
are formed from seed, some from slips planted out, 
others by sideshoots (e.g., the onion tribe). Now the 
last-named is the method by which mussels are 
formed ; small ones are always growing up by the 
the salamander, which cannot be destroyed by fire; the 
History of Animals passage is, however, excised by A.-W. 
There is a long discussion in Jaeger, Aristotle, 144-148, in 
which the doctrine of fire-animals is involved. Jaeger tries 
to prove that the doctrine that there were animals that were 

ed in fire must have come in one of Aristotle’s 
dialogues (On Philosophy), and by a curious blunder states 
that it does not come in History of Animals (loc. cit., to which 
he actually refers) ; but in fact Aristotle’s words are yivera 
Onpia €v tS mvpi. Jaeger makes no reference at all to the 

present passage. 
» Of. P.A. 11. 649 a 22 ff., G. & C. 11. 331 b 25, Meteor. 
I, cbh. 3, 4, etc. ; 
© Lit., the nature, i.¢., the physical structure; of the 
Testacea. See Introd. §§ 26, 27. 
N 353 

ARISTOTLE «© |” 

761 b > , A ‘ ’ Ares 44 
THY apyyv. KihpuKes dé Kal mropdipar Kal Ta 
Acyopeva Kypidlev olov ard OTEpLaTLKAS picews 
mpolevrau pvEddeis byporntras (oméppa & odfev 
Tovra det vopilecv, dAAG KaTa TOV elpny.evov 

35 Tpomov. perexew THs djLoLoTnTos Tots purois: dud 
Kat ylverau 7AjOos Tov TOLOUTWY orav dag 
762a ~-yeévnral TL, mavTa pev yap TavTa Kal abrépara. 
ovpPaiver yiveoba, Kata Adyov dé Kal trapEavrwv 
ovviracbat paMov). meptylyveabau yap Tt meEpit- 
TWA TpOs EKdOTW THS apxAs eVAoyov, ap’ is. 
5 mapaBAacraver Trav Tapapvopevay € €xaoTov. emt 
d€ mapamAnoiav exer THY S¥vapyw 7 Tpody Kal TO 
TauTys TepitTwpa, (TO) TOV KypialdvTwy Gpotov® 
eikds €or elvar TH €€ apyfs* overdo [odciay]* 
dvd7rep edAoyov yiveoOat Kai €x ravrns. . 
“Ooa de pajre mapaPAaordver pare enprdtet, 
Tovrewy € mayro  yéveots avropares ‘€oTw. 
10 mdvra be Ta. ovuvioTdpmeva TOV TpoTrov ToOroy Kal 
ev yh Kal ev vdaTe patverat ywopeva. pera onpews 
Kal puyvupevou Too opBpiov vdaTos* dtroKpwo- 
pevov yap Tob yAvréos els THY OUYLOTAMEVHV dipx7y 
TO TrEepiTTevov ToLavTyHV AapBaver popdyv. ‘yiveTar 
& odvfév onmopevoy adAd meTrropevov 7 dé anys 

we ob Platt. 2 (70) Peck. 
® duoor Peck : éuotav vulg. * fort. rijs dpxijs. leg. 
5 odciav om. Z, secl. A.-W.: pro odveiav coni. Platt zi 
rrapdpuow, 
8 repryiyveocOas (a 3). . . Tavrns.om. X. 

* The ‘‘honeycombs” are really the eggs of these 
Gastropods, and Aristotle rightly recognizes their nature, as 
against later scientists who regarded them as distinct species 
of animals. 

> As against none, in the case of spontaneous generation. 

354 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. xz. 

side of the original one. The whelks and purpuras | 
_and those which, as the phrase goes, are “ honey- 
_combers ”’¢ emit quantities of slimy fluid emanating 
as it were from some seminal substance. (We must 
not, however, consider any of these substances as 
being semen proper ; instead, we should regard them 
as sharing in the resemblance to plants in the way 
already mentioned._And that is why a large number ..- 
of such creatures is produced when once one has been 
produced, since, as all these creatures are in fact pro- 
duced spontaneously as well, pro rata more of them 
arise if there are actually some” present to start 
with.) After all, it is reasonable to suppose that 
_ there is a surplus portion of residue close by each of 
the original stock, from which each of the sideshoots 
‘springs up.. And since the residue is a substance 
_ possessing one and the same character as the nourish- 
ment of which it is the residue, it is probable that 
: the stuff produced by the “* honeycombers ”’ is similar 
_ to the substance out of which they were originally 
_ constituted ; hence it is reasonable to suppose that 
; _it too ° gives rise to young ones. 
__ All which neither produce sideshoots nor make () spon- 
A “honeycombs ” reproduce by spontaneous genera- 200s 
Stic * amt all which arise in this nalitiag wHisther  Seepaersese 
5 _ land or in the water come to be formed, as can be 
_ seen, to the accompaniment of putrefaction and ad- 
_ mixture of rainwater: as the sweet ingredients are 
; separated off into the principle which is taking form, 
that which remains over assumes a putrefying aspect.4 
Nothing, however, is formed by a process of putrefac- 
_ tion, but by a process of concoction : the putrefaction 

SS Ame a ae 

© i.e., as well as residues such as semen. 
4 i.¢., putrefies. 

355 

ae ae 

762 a 

ARISTOTLE 

15 Kal TO onmTov Tepitrwua Tod mebbévtos €oriv: 
od0ev yap ex mavros yiverat, Ka0drep odd’ ev Tots 
b70 THs Texvns Snpvoupyoupevors* odbev yap ay 
ede. moveiv? viv dé TO pev } TEXVN TOV axpnoT@Y 
adaupet, TO 8” a pros. 

Tiverau 3° ev vi Kal ev dyp@ TO. loa Kal Ta 

20 pura did TO ev yh pev Bdwp v dmdpxew, ev & vdare 
mebua, év d€ rovTw mavti Deppdryta xuyxuKiy, 
Wore TpoTov Twa Tavra YuyAs elvas mAjpn* 606 
ovvloTarar Taxéws, OrdoTay eurepiAngOy. €pmrept- 
AapPdverar d5€ Kai yiverar Oeppawoudvwv tav 
cwpaTiKav byp@v olov adpwdns moudddAv€. at 

25 ev odv Siadopai Tod Tiidtepov elvat TO ‘yevos 
Kal diripdrepov TO Graney ev TH mrepidripet 
Tis dpxiis THS Puxucts elow.' TovTov® dé Kai ot 
TOMOL. alTioL Kal TO odp.a TO mepthayBavdpevov. 
ev d€ 77H Oaddtrn odd TO ye@des Eveotiw: SidTEp 
eK Ths ToLavTNS GvoTdcews 7) TOV doTpaKodépuwV 

30 yiwerar dois, KUKAw@ pev TOO yedwdSous oKAnpuVvo- 
pevou Kal mnyvupevou av adriy mew tois oarois 
Kat Tots Képact (upt yap drnKra. TaorT coriy), 
evTos de wepiAapBavouevov. Tob tiv Cwhv ExovTo 
owpLaros. " “sae 

Movov 5€ tdv Tovovrwv ovvdvaldpevov Ewparat 
TO TGV KoxAdv yévos. et 8° Ex To’ svvdvacpod 

liciow Peck: éorw vulg. 2 rovrwr P. 

@ This of course is not intended to cover the developmen 
of a larva once it has been constituted. 
» Cf. above, 736 b 35 ff., and App. B §§ 13-17. 

356 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x1. 

and the putrefied matter are a residue of that which 
has been concocted, for no creature’s formation uses 
up the whole of the material,* any more than in the 
case of objects fashioned by the agency of art, other- 
wise there would be no need to make anything at all, 
whereas what happens in actual fact is that the use- 
less material is removed in the one case by art and 
_in the other by Nature. 

Animals and plants are formed in the earth and in 
the water because in earth water is present, and in 
water pneuma is present, and in all pneuma soul-heat is 
present,” so that in a way all things are full of Soul ; 
and that is why they quickly take shape once it has 
_been enclosed. Now it gets enclosed as the liquids 
containing corporeal matter © become heated, and 
there is formed as it were a frothy bubble. The 
_ object which thus takes shape may be more valuable 
in kind or less valuable ; and the differences herein 
depend upon the envelope which encloses the soul- 
_ principle ; and the causes which determine this are 
_ the situations where the process takes place and the 
_ physical substance which is enclosed. Now in the 
sea earthy substance is plentiful, and that is why 
the Testacea? are formed and constructed out of a 
_ composition which is earthy in character : the earthy 
_ substance hardens all round and congeals in the same 
_ way that bones and horns do (since these cannot be 
_ melted by fire), while within it the physical substance 
_ that contains the life becomes enclosed. 

_ Of such creatures the only tribe which has been 
_ observed to copulate is that of the snails ; but whether 

_ * Sea-water is such a liquid ; see above, 761 b 9 and im- 
_ mediately below, 1.27. Also App. B §§ 13-17. 
_  # Lit., the nature of the Testacea; cf. above, 761 b 24. 

357 

ARISTOTLE © ia 

Men 3 7 yévects abra@v cor i Pm oteen owrrat 
ixavas. ae 
darripesse S° av tis Foudspenos boas. tnreiv,, a 

762 b TO KaTa THY BALKIY apxnv ovvioTdpevov eoTw ev 
Tots TowovToLs. ev pev yap Tots OjAeou repitrapd 

tt Tob Cwou robr’ éoriv, 6 7) mapa Tod appevos 
apy?) Kwodca, Svvdjer Towodrov dv olov ad’ obmep 
HAdev, dmoreAet 76 Cov, evradOa Se ri Set Aéyew 
576 rovdrov, Kal mébev Kal tis ) Kwodoa apxi) 7 
Kata 76 dppev; Set 81) AaBeivy Sti Kai ev Tots 
Lou trois yerrdow ex Tis eiovodons tpopas ev 
T® Caw Oepyotyns amoKxpivovea Kal oupmértovea 
mou TO maeene TV épxiv Too pats, ai 
ees, dé Kai ev dutois, whi ev pev TovTots Kal 

10 €v tiot TOV Cabwy obbev mpoodeiras Tis TO dppevos 
apxns (exer yap ev adrois peuypevynv), To de TOV 
mrciotwr Caw repitrwpa mpocdeirar. tpody 5° 
éotl tois pev vdwp Kal yh, Tois 5é Ta ex TOUTwY, 

~ dof drep 7 ev Tots Cobois Depporyns ex THs Tpopfs 
amepydlerar, TOO” 1 THs Wpas ev TH meprexovTe 

15 Oepporns €x Oaddtrns Kal yas ovyKpive. TéTTOVES 
Kat eet irik TO 8 évamroAapBavdmevov 7) azo 
wie pee ev T@ mvevpatt THs puxucts exis 

KUN LO. TOLEL Kal Kkivnow evtiOnow. 7 peev oov TOV 

@ See note, 767 b 17. 
358 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. xt. 

_ or not their generation is the result of such copulation 
_ has not so far been adequately observed. 

Anyone who wishes to follow the right line of in- Theory of 
quiry might well inquire what it is which, as it takes Gmatien. 
shape, corresponds in the case of these creatures 
to the “ material principle.’ In females of course 
_ this is a residue produced by the animal, a residue 
which potentially is such as the parent is from which 
it came, and which is perfected into an animal by the 
_ principle from the male * imparting movement to it. 
_ In the present case, however, what are we to describe 

as holding this sort of position ? and whence comes 
_ the principle that imparts movement, corresponding to 
_ the male, and what is it? Now we must apprehend 
' that, even in the case of those animals which generate, 
itis thei incoming nourishment that is the material out 
_ of which the heat residing in the animal produces 
the residue—the “ principle”’ of the fetation—by 
setting it apart and concocting it. Similarly with 
. plants, except that with them and certain of the 
_ animals there is no need of the principle of the male 
_ ever and above that, because they contain in eae 
_ selves this principle mixed (with the female) ; 

' most animals, however, the residue does need this 
_ principle. Of the one set, the nourishment is water 
_and earth; of the other, it is the things that are 
_ formed out of these ; so that in their case the seasonal 
_ heat present in their environment causes to accumu- 
' late and to take shape by means of concoction out 
_ of sea-water and earth that which in the case of 
_ animals the heat present in them produces out of the 
nourishment. And that portion of the soul-principle 
_ which gets enclosed or separated off within the pneuma 
_ makes a fetation and implants movement init. Now 

359 

ARISTOPLE lt / ASANO 

762 b 
gutav TtOv amo Tavropdrov Raptors te odorants 

OpoeLOys €oTw: EK Twos yap popliov yiverat, kal 

2070 prev apyn TO Sé€ Tpodi) yiverar 7 mpaitn Tots 
> t 1 \ \ A , ; ; fae sitar 
expuopevos.' ta dé t&v Cawy oKxwAnKoroxetrat 

Kal TOV avaiwwv doa jt) aro ev hive" Kal 
f} WwW 
Tov evayuwv, olov yevos TL KeoTpéwy Ka 
ToTapiov ixOdwv, ére 5€ TO TOV. eyxeheww yevos: 
t+ 
25 dmavra yap Tara, Kaimep dAtyayov ExovTa TIV 
dvow, duws evaysd €or, Kal Kapdiav Exovar TV 
apxiv Tv T@v poplwy atwarucny. ta dé Kadov-— 
preva ys évrepa axwAnkos exer Pda, €v ois ey- 
/ ‘ a! SB Pee Si tani fd . 
yiveTat TO Cpa TO THY eyyeAewv. 810 Kal TeEpt 
Tis T&v avOpwmwy Kal teTpaTddwyv yeverews 
c 4 yw ” i ryan / 7 : jairl 
broAdBo. Tis av, elmep eylyvovTd mote ynyevels, 
¢ , , t , . bir 
30 Womep pact twes, dvo TpdTMVY TovTwY* yiweaIaL 
A 7 ” \ e / iy) 
TOV ETEpov’ 7) yap ws oKwAnKos auViaTapévov TO 
~ w >? 2A > A \ * > ¢ ms 
mp@tov 7 €€ wav, avayKaiov yap 7) ev abtrots 
exew THVv Tpodny eis THY avenow (ro Se Towodrov 
KUnpa oKw@AnE €otiv) 7 AapBavew ddAdAobev, Toro 

1 hic lacunam statuit Platt. 
2 rovtwv PZ, istorum X: om. vulg. 

« Cf. 715 b 27 “ they are formed when - + « certain par ts 
in plants become putrescent . . . as for instance the mistletoe.” 
®° See above, 741 b 1. 

360 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. xt. 

_ as for plants, the manner in which those plants take 
_ shape which are generated spontaneously is uniform : 
they are formed from a part ? of something, and some 
of it forms into the “ principle,’ some into the first 
_ nourishment of the germinating plants. As for the 
_ animals, however, some of them are brought forth 
as larvae, both the bloodless ones that are not 
formed from living animals, and some blooded ones 
(examples are a kind of cestreus® and other river 
fishes, also the eel tribe): all of these, although by 
_ nature they have but little blood, nevertheless are 
blooded animals and have a heart, which is the 
_“ principle” of the parts and bloodlike in constitu- 
tion. The “ earth’s-guts ” as they are called have 
_ the nature of a larva; the body of the eels forms 
_ within them.° Hence, too, with regard to the genera- 
_ tion of human beings and quadrupeds, if once upon 
_ a time they were “ earthborn”’ as some allege,’ one 
_ might assume them to be formed in one of these two 
_ ways—either it would be by a larva taking shape to 
_ begin with, or else they were formed out of eggs, 
_ since of necessity they must either contain the 
_ nourishment for their growth within themselves 
(and a fetation of this sort is a larva) or they must 
_ get it from elsewhere, and that means either from 
* The “ earth’s-guts *’ are apparently the round-worm 
_ Gordius. Cf. H.A. 570 a 15 ff., where they are said to be 
_ “formed spontaneously in mud and humid ground . . . for 
_ it is by the water’s edge that the heat of the sun is strong and 
_ causes putrefaction.” See note on eels, p. 565. 
_. # This was an old and traditional belief; ¢f. Plato, Politi- 
_ cus 269 8; in Hat. VIII. 55 there is a reference to *‘ Erechtheus, 
_ who is said to have been ynyejs”: cf. also Empedocles, 
_ Diels, Vorsokr.* 31 B 62 “ First whole-natured forms sprang 

_ up from the earth, having a portion both of water and fire” ; 
_ and ibid. B 57; 96; 98. And above, G.A. 722 b 20 ff. 

361 

Traditional 
view of the 
origin of 
man and 
animals. 

762 b 

763 a 

35 

5 

10 

15 

ARISTOFPLE )) 1 41a a0 

8 7) ex Tis yerrwons 7) ex: popiov Tob KUnpaTos* 

7 > ro / > 4 > tal : a ~ 
wot «i Odrepov adtvarov, emippeiv eK THs yAs- 

womep év Tois' Cwous ek THS pNTpos, avayKatov EK 
optov AapBdvew Tod Kunpatos* THv Sé Tovad 

> > ~ i vA 7) bi TT A et : 

e€ wod A€yopev elvar yeveow. Stu pev odv, ElTrEp 

= > \ As , -~ a , ope : ’ 
iW Tis apy?) THs yeveoews TAar Tots Cyows, evAoyov 

toiv Svoiy Tovrow elvar Ti éTépav, avepov: ArTov 
&° eyes Adyov ek TOV Wav: ovbevds yap TovadTnV 

Cc aA 7 / > \ \ a. v ~ J 
op@puev Cwou yéveow, adda Thy érépav, Kat TOV — 

evaiwwy Tov pnbévtwv Kal THY avaiwwv. Towadtra 
& éoti trav 7 evTropwv eva Kal Ta doTpaKddepua 
TEpt @v O Adyos: ov yap €k poplov yivovTat Twos, 
Gonep Ta WoToKovpeva, TovodvTar Sé Kal THV 
avénow cpolws tois oxwAnéw: emi Ta avw yap 
Kal TIv apxnv advédvovra. ot oxwAnKess ev TO 
KaTw yap 1) Tpod) Tois dvw. Kal TOOTS ye dpolws 
éxet Tots ex TOV WAV, TAHV exeiva pev KaTava- 
Nioker wav, ev S€ Tots axwAnKoToKoUpEevols, OTAaV 
av&On éx Tis év TH Kdtw popiw avoTtdcews TO 
dvw pdpiov, ovtws ek Tod broAoimouv SiapOpodrat 
To KaTwbev. airiov &° dtu Kai Borepov 7) TpoP7 EV 
T@ popiw T@ bro To trdlwya ywera Taow. Tt 
S€ TodTov Tov TpdmOV ToLEeiTAL TA OKWANKWOSN THY 

1 G\dows post ois vulg.: om. PZ, 

* i.e., in the uterus. 

> j.¢., the egg. Thus the three possibilities are—produc- 
tion as larvae; viviparously ; oviparously. . It should not 
be supposed that Aristotle seriously envisages the possibility 

of this sort of ‘‘ evolution’; but in view of the popular — 

nature of the belief he thinks fit to show by which of the three 

modes. of generation these “ earthborn ’’ men would have — 

been produced, if they had been produced. 
¢ Spontaneous generation from eggs. 

362 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x1. 

the female parent * or from part of the fetation ° ; 
so that if the former way is impossible (¢.e., if it 

cannot flow to them out of the earth as it. flows to 
_ animals from the mother), of necessity they must get 
it from part of the fetation, and generation of this 
sort we call generation from an egg. Thus much, 
therefore, is plain: if there were a “ principle’ of 
_ their generation in the case of all animals, we should 
reasonably expect it to be one or other of these two, 
larva or egg. Itis, however, less reasonable to hold 
that their generation would take place out of eggs, 
because in the case of no animal do we observe this 
sort of generation to occur, whereas we do see the 
other, in the case both of the blooded animals I 
mentioned 7 and the bloodless ones. Under this 

_ latter heading come certain of the Insects, and also 

the Testacea with which our discussion is concerned : 
they are not formed out of a part of something as 
are the creatures produced from eggs, and further, 
they effect their growth in a similar way to larvae, 
for larvae grow towards the upper part, towards the 
“ pxinciple,” the nourishment for the upper parts 
being in the lower part. In this respect they re- 
semble the creatures that are produced from eggs, 
except that the latter use up the whole of the egg, 
whereas, in the case of those produced from larvae, 
when the upper part has grown by drawing on the 
substance in the lower part, then the lower part 
becomes articulated out of what remains. The 
reason for this is that {not only in the early stages 
but) afterwards as well * the nourishment is produced 
in the part below the diaphragm in all animals. 
That the larva-like creatures effect their growth in 

@ Cestreus and eels. ¢ When they are fully grown. 
363 

763 a 

763 b 

ARISTOTLE AUSAG 

avénow, dijrov emt Tav pehurr@v Kat T@Vv ToOLOU- 
Tw? Kar dpxas yap TO bev KaTw pSpov peya 

20 €xovat, TO 8” ava) eAatrov. Kal é ent Tov dorpaKo- 

dépuwy Sé tov adrov TpoTrov exet Ta Tepl TV 
avénow. pavepov de Kal Toor’ emit TaY oTpoupw- 
dav <evy' Tats eAucaus: del yap adgavopevev 
yivovrat peilous® emi ro mpoabiov Kat vi seONOWE 
pevnv Kepadny. 

“Ov pev obv tpdorov exer 7) yeveats Kal ToUTwY Kal 

25 TOV aAAwy THv adbroudtwv, cipynrar oyeddv. 

“Ore 5€ ovviorata: abropata mavTa Ta doTpa- 
Kddeppia, pave pov €x TOV TowovTwv, OTL mpds TE 
TOUS moious yiverau onmopevns Tis dadpaddsovs 
iAvos, Kal moMaxo8b, od mpoTepov ovbev dmiipxe 
ToovTov, votepov i Eevdevay vypod tod TomoU 

30 BopBopwhévros eyevero Ta Kadovpeva ApvooTpea 

TaV ooTpaknp@v, olov mepi “Pddov mapaBaddvros 
vavriKod atdAov. Kal exBAnbevreny Kepapiiwy eis 

TV Odharray, xXpovov yevopevou Kal BopBopov mepl 
ated. cuvadicbévtos, CoTpea ebploxovr’ ev adtois. 
étt 8° ovd adinot Ta Toiabra ovdev ad adrav 
yevvnTiKov, TeKunpLov: Emel yap Xiolt Twes €k 
Iluppas tis ev AéoBw ta&v dorpéwy Sdiekdpicay 

1 (év) A.-W.: Kal rats S: ent rats PZ: rats vulg. 
2 peilous Platt: mAeiovs vulg., om. Y. 

: 

* This does not entirely square with what has been said, 
although Aristotle seems to think that even those which are 
generated otherwise are also spontaneously generated ; see 
761 b 25 ff. : > Cf..436 a 13 i. 

¢ 7.e., when there is only mud and no water in the lagoon ; 
cf. H.A. V1, ch..15. 

364 

a 

a 

tailed eats Ral at 

~ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. x1. 

this manner is plain in the case of bees and insects 
of that sort, as their lower part is Iarge to start with 
and the upper part smaller. The arrangements for 
growth in the Testacea are on the same lines. This 
is shown in the convolutions of the spiral-shelled 
creatures, which as they gréw always become larger 
towards the front and the “ head ” as it is called. 

- This practically completes our description of the 
manner of generation of these animals and of the 

-others that are generated spontaneously. 

The fact that all* the Testacea take shape spon- 
taneously is shown by considerations like the follow- 
ing: They form on the side of boats when the frothy 
slime” putrefies; and also, in many places where 
nothing of the kind had been present previously, 
after a time when the place has become muddy 
owing to lack of water,* lagoon-oysters,’ as they are 
called, a kind of testaceous animal, have been formed; 
for example, on an occasion when a naval squadron 
east anchor off Rhodes, some earthenware pots were 
thrown out into the sea, and as time went on and 
mud had collected round them, oysters were con- 
tinually found inside them. Here is a piece of 
evidence to show that animals of this kind emit no 
generative substance : people from Chios transported 
some live oysters across from Pyrrha in Lesbos,’ 

4 Cf. H.A. 547 b 11. Apparently barnacles, which are, 
however, Crustacea, not Testacea. 

¢ The lagoon at Pyrrha seems, as D’Arcy Thompson 
(prefatory note to translation of H.A.) suggests, to have 
been one of the chief places where Aristotle carried on his 
researches. The strait leading to it is mentioned again at 
P.A. 680 b 1 (a passage where also the “ eggs” of sea- 
urchins and oysters are discussed), and several times in H.A. 
Cf. 761 b 4. 

365 

Examples of 
spontaneous 
generation. 

ARISTOTLE ange 

763 b is — 
laévra Kai eis témovs Twas Tis Badarrns edpt- 
modes Kal Opoppous' adeioav, TAciw pev TO 

, : Mies 
xpovw oddev eyéveto, TO dé péyeBos cis avénow 

5 émédwKe TOA. Ta dé Aeyopeva wa odPev cupBad- 
Aerau mpos tiv yeveow, GAd eotiv edrpopias 

A > a > e , ey 
onpetov, olov ev Tots evaiors 4 mudTHS* dio Kat 
‘ \ > \ id a \ hae ? ‘ 
mpos TiHv edwoiy yiverar edyvpua KaTa TOdS KaLpOUS 
TovTovs. onpeiov S Sr. Ta Towabra adel Exovow, 
ofov ai mivar Kal of KipuKes Kal at mopdupar, 7Arv 
Con \ t dyes $key Pe ” att is ST bop 

10 6ré prev preilw oré 8° eAdtTw. eva 8 ovK ael, 

a“ = 
GANG Tod pev Eapos Exovat, mpoBawvovons Se Pbiver 
Fae \ D 2 / , ‘ i ¢ 
Ths dpas, Kat réAos adavilerar mdptrav, ofov ot 
/ \ c 4 \ \ 4 “ 
Te KTEévES Kal of pes Kal TA KaAOUpEVa ApvdoTpEa* 
€ \ C7] ” t a eters | , wae 
7 yap wpa avrn ovpdeper tois oapacw adrav. 
Tots 5€ avpPaiver Tovodrov ovdev émidnAov, olov 

15 trois TnAJois. Ta dé Kal” Exacta mept ToUTwWY, Kal 
ev ols yivovrat TomoLs, ek THS Lotopias Oewpeicbw. 

fy 

1 Sudppous Platt: dudpovs Z: dpotovs vulg. 

pas 

« The characteristic of a edpuzos is the force and violence 
of the currents sweeping through it ; hence there is no oppor- 
tunity for mud to collect and so for any Testacea to arise. 
Platt’s conjecture dydppous is also supported by the use of the 

366 

: 

_ GENERATION OF ANIMALS, III. xz. 

and deposited them in some sea-straits where the 
currents met.* As time passed the oysters did not 
increase at all in number, but they grew greatly 
in size. As for their “ eggs,’’® as they are called, 
_ these contribute nothing to generation; they are 

just a sign of good nourishment, like fat in blooded 
_ animals, and that too is why they are tasty to eat at 
these seasons. A proof of this is that these creatures 
—e.g., pinnae, whelks and purpurae—have such 
_ “ eggs” as these always, only sometimes they are 
larger, sometimes smaller. Others—e.g., pectens, 
_ mussels and the lagoon-oysters as they are called— 
do not have them always, but only in the spring ; as 
_ the season advances they wane, and finally disappear 
_ altogether ; the reason being that the spring-season 
is favourable to their physical condition. In others 
_ —e.g., the seasquirts—nothing of the kind is to be 
_ detected. For an account dealing with these in- 
_ dividually, and the places where they. grow, the 
_ student Should consult the Researches. 

_ verb pém elsewhere in connexion with edpimos, e.g. E.N. 
1167 bT péver 7a BovAedwara kai ob perappet dowep evpimos: 
_ ef. Prob. 940 b 16 of evpimor péovow, and De somno et vig. 
_ 456b21. Gaza’s translation luto similia seems to imply the 
_ reading BopBopwdas, which is entirely against the sense. 

> See note on 763 b I. , 

367 

‘ang ‘spaiq ‘Jo UORBOYISSE|D Ployooryy B ORUE, =i Se auras ROWE GS-1 4 6FL IV 

pe I oe me Pd) syavasey is 
a Se Mores ‘moureds ‘Avf : 
Ds —  - SYoor ‘MOTD FY SEALE SplIq-10? AA 
Prue © ye poureu spaiq- - SaAOPeT}ANy * Yorsyso 
SS. Boe : yews pue s[Moj DluelIpy ‘sedopSuls ‘suoesig ‘sospiyaed ‘spmoj “O-7 
re +3 : u9jo 
~ >. pyrpoad jon ; ay oyyorg ynq ‘moj Avy * mous soso Auvul ‘oyT[O1g 
» SIOYPeIZ -. 
puP SSULA 0} ONprIsay _ enptsat yonyy SSULM 0} ONPIsey 
eS (39% $69 "F'd) ae 
“(sour woaj ved) [peur .: yews satpog Ay[ng sotpoq Ay[nq ‘Lavozy 
(peuopes-O0%D) Sat] (Fd) SIT SIIT] VT SL9IJ-UON 
: a ' qd 6 V 

(uoynnipssnjo Yfyuarss D SP-aNjvA OU SHY IT 
“spa fo ns apeceiee 820s ey fo burpnas ayy 0} pi un sv fijaj08 pe,on.ysU0d Sey SDY 0190} SLY.T) 

Saduld JO WIAVL 

WE a es 

ne a Te 

xtra embryo, . 
coelom 

extra-embryonic 
coelom 

- SIMPLIFIED DIAGRAM (LONGITUDINAL SECTION) TO ILLUS- 

TRATE THE MEMBRANES OF THE CHICK EMBRYO 

The dotted lines represent mesoblast. The diagram shows the state 
of development after about ten days. The embryo itself is in the 
central part of the diagram. Immediately above the gut is the noto- 
chord (shown in black), and immediately above that is the nerve-cord, 
of which the right end is the brain. The two “ umbilical cords’ 
mentioned by Aristotle (III. 753 b 20° ff.) are shown : (a) the yolk-sac 
stalk, (5) the stalk of the allantois. 

To begin with, the embryo is a sort of thin plate on top of the yolk ; 
and as time goes on, both the amniotic cavity (which encloses the 
embryo) and the allantois (which acts as a respiratory organ and as a 
receptacle for excreta) progressively encircle the yolk, which finally 
becomes enclosed in the embryo (as Aristotle says). The chorion and 

coalesce after a period, and the resulting chorio-allantois then 
corresponds to the fetal placenta of mammals. The chorion is really 
the outer layer of the amnion. The extra-embryonic coelom, which 
is lined with mesoblast, is an extension of the coelom proper (the 

main body-cavity), which is also lined with mesoblast. 
369 

A 

763b201 Ilepi pev odv ris yevécews ths Tv Cawy elipynrar 
Kal Kowh Kal ywpls tepl mavTwy. met 8° ev Tois 

, > A 2 Hy \ a \ An we 
tehewrdtos atta@v eoti to OAV Kai TO dppev 

/ ‘ 4 \ / > aA 
KEXWPLOMEVOV, KAL TAUVTAS Tas duvdeus apxas 
dapev elvar ravtTwv Kai Cow Kat dutdv, adda ra 
25 wev adtas aywpiotovs exer Ta S€ Keywpiopevas, 
Aekréov Tepi THs yevéeoews THs TovTwWY TpP@ToV- 
ETL yap ateA@v dvtwy ev TH yéver Stopilera ro 
OjAv Kat TO adppev. mdTepov Sé Kal piv SHAnv 

\ § eid \ \ ” ¢ A ‘ \ 
THhv Svadopay elvar mpos thy aicbnow yyav TO bev 

~ ‘ > ” > / > ~ ‘ / A 
OfjAv ro 8 dppev eotiv, ev TH pntpl AaBdovta rHv 
30 Suadopav 7 mpdrepov, audioByreirar. acl yap 
ot pev ev Tots oneppacw elvar tavrny THY evay- 
tiwow ed0ds, olov "Avagaydpas Kal €repor tev 
duovordywr: yivesbai te yap é€x Tod dppevos Td 

2 See Introd. § 76. 

> See Introd. § 26. © See Introd. § 11. 

¢ The first microscopically visible signs of sex-differentia- 
tion occur about the fifth day in the chick. Aristotle was 
quite justified in his belief that sex-differentiation occurs 
early. We know to-day that sex is determined genetically 
from the moment of fertilization, since some animals have 
two kinds of sperm and others have two kinds of egg. 

370 

¥ 

BOOK IV 

_ Tue formation of animals, both in general and as con- 

- cerns all of them separately, has now been dealt with. 

Since, however, in the most perfect * of them the 
male and the female are separate, and we hold that 
these characteristics are “ principles”’ ¢ of all animals 
and all plants alike (the only difference being that in 
some these “principles” are inseparable while in 
others they are separate), we must deal. with the 

_ formation of these first of all, for male and female 
become distinct while animals are still imperfect 
in kind.? It is however not agreed whether one is 

male and another female even before the difference 
is plain to our senses, the difference being acquired 

_ by them either within the mother or earlier. Thus, 

some people, such as Anaxagoras and certain other 

_ physiologers,’ say that this opposition exists right 
_ back in the semens,/ alleging that the semen comes 

__ Aristotle’s view will be found in the passage below, 766.2 30- 

b3._. The heart is the first thing to be formed in the embryo, 

_ because it is the seat of 76 @ tKov, the nutritive part of the 
_ Soul; and ro O@pemrixor is a uxov (see 735 a 17 ff., 
744 b 36, n.). Salocus/ tas Uneaeeheran en beck to she 

heart, which, as also containing the principle of vital heat, 

_ is the source of concoction, upon which ability to produce 
_ semen, etc., depends. 

* See pp. xvif. 
? This is an example of the view that the difference is 

: acquired ‘‘ earlier *’ than in the mother. 

371 

I 

Origin of 
sex-differ- 
entiation. 
Various 
theories : 

Anaxagoras, 

ARISTOTLE 

763 b . 
o7épua, TO dé OAAV Tapéxew Tov ToTOV, Kal elvat 
TO ev Gppev ex Tov deEi@v To dé OAAV ex TaV 
dpiotep@v [kal THs boTépas TA pev appeva ev Tots 
764 a defvois elvae Ta 5é Ojdrea ev Tois dprorepois |." of 
8 ev TH wyjtpa, Kkabdrep "Eprredoxdjjs" Ta pev yap 
eis Deppny eAPovra Tv borépay dppeva yiveobat 
pyar 7a 8 eis puxpay OjAea, THs de Deppornros 
5 kal Tis uxporntos THY T@v Kkarapnviey airiay 
elvar p pvow, 7 uxporépay ovoay 7) Oepporéepay, Kal 
7) maAatorepay 7) 7 Tpooparwrépay. Anpskpitos be 
6 >AP8npirns ev pev tH pntpl yiveoOai dyno THv 
diadopay Tod OjAcos Kal Tod dppevos, od pevTou 
dua Deppornra ye Kal yuxpornra TO pev yiyveatau 
10 Of Av TO 6° dppev, GAN _ OmroTEpou dy Kpation TO 
oméppa Td amd Tod popiov €Afov @ Sdiadepovow 
dA Aw To OAV Kal TO appev. TodTo yap as 
adAnbas "EpredoxAjjs. pabvporepov dreiAnger, old~ 
pLevos puxpornre kal Deppornre diadepeww _pevov 
aAAjAwY, op@v dAa Ta pope. pHeydAny €xovra 
15 Svadopay Thy Te TOV aidolwy Kal THY Tis dorépas. 
el yap TetAacpevwr Tav Cawyv, Tod pev TA pLOpta 

1 seclusi, nam argumento aliena ;. cf. 765 a 22. 

4 This is a view put forward also in the Humenides of 
‘Aeschylus (658 ff.) by Apollo, who cites the apposite example 
of Athena standing by his side: 

ovK €oTL pyTHp TOD KeKAnpEevov TEKVvOU 

toKeus, Tpodos S¢ KUparos veoomdpov. 

tixter 8 6 Opwcxwy, etc. 
(rod in the first line is Headlam’s emendation for 7.) In his 
commentary, ii, 293-294, G. Thomson gives references to a 
similar belief among the Egyptians and primitive peoples in 
Australia and South America ; the reference which he gives 

372 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. r. 

int® being from the male, while the female provides 
the space for it,* and that the male comes from the 
right side” and the female from the left [and, as 
regards the uterus, that the males are in the right 
side and the female in the left]. Others, like 
Empedocles, hold that the opposition begins in the 
womb ; according to him, the semens which enter a 
hot womb become males, those which enter a cold 
one, females*; and that the cause of this heat and 
cold is the menstrual flow, according as it is hotter or 
colder, older or more recent.’ Democritus of Abdera 
holds that the difference of male and female is pro- 
duced in the womb, certainly, but denies that it is 
on account of heat and cold that one becomes male 
and another female ; this is determined, he asserts, 
according to which of the two parents’ semen prevails, 
the semen, that is to say, which has come from the 
part wherein male and female differ from one another.’ 
After all, Empedocles was really rather slipshod in 
his assumption, in supposing that the two differ from 
each other merely in virtue of heat and cold, when 
he could see that the whole of the parts concerned— 
the male pudenda and the uterus—exhibit a great 
difference; for supposing that once the animals have 
been fashioned, and one has got all the parts of the 
for the Pythagoreans is, however, to a different doctrine from 
this. See also G. Thomson, Aeschylus and Athens (1941), 
and for other references to such views and their social con- 
sequences, J. Needham, History of Embryology, 25 ff. 
i.e., the right testis. 

¢ ‘These words must be an interpolation, as they are incon- 
sistent with the view just described. Cf. 765 a 22. 

@ See quotation, 723 a 24. 

¢ These terms, as Platt suggests, may echo Empedocles’ 
own words. The hotter will of course be the more recent. 

* See note on the theory of “‘ pangenesis,”’ 721 b 9. 

373 

Empedocles 
nd 

a 
Democritus. 

764 a 

ARISTOTLE (¢ 4) 

€xovros Ta TOD OijAcos TavrTa., 708 dé Ta Tod Bp- 
pevos, kabdrep els Kd putvov eis 77 dorépay rebein, 
TO peev exov toréepav eis Deppny, TO O€ By ets 
puxpay, € EoTaL OAdv TO ovK €xoV barépay Kat dppev 
20 TO EXOV. totto 8 aédvvarov. adore Tourn ye 
BeArvov & av Aéyou Anudxpiros’ Eyre? yap TavTns ais 
yevéoews ry Sadopav" Kal TEe~paTat Aéyew <i be 
kaddis. 7) 7 #9) KaA@s, €TEpos Adyos. adda. pay Kav 
el” TOV jLopiwv Tis dvadopas airiov 7) Bepporns kab 
25 poxporns, TobTo Aextéov ui Tots exetvens Néyou- 
ow: robTo yap €oTw ws etrelv TO Aéyew mreph 
yevéoews dppevos ‘kal Ojos: Tovrous® yap Sragéper : 
pavepas. ov Hucpov de" épyov TO am exeivns THs 
apyis mepl THs Lyevecews TovTwy TOY joptwy THY 
airiav ovvayayeiy, ws avayKatov® dxorovbeiv poxo- 
pevm pev TO Cow yiveobar tobto 76 _bepov nv 
30 KaAobow dorépay, Deppawopevey be pay yiveoOat. 
Tov advrov bé Tporrov Kal rept Tov els THY OpAtav 
ovvredovvtwv people: Kat yap Tadta Siagéper, 
Kabarrep elpnrat TpOTEpov. 
"Eu de yiverau didupa Orv Kat dppev dpe. ev 
T@ adT@ popiw TodAAdkis THs borépas, Kat Too” 

1 Sradopas tH yéveow coni. Platt. 
> P 7’ 

2 et PSYZ: 7 vulg. ; exit 
3 sovrois Peck : rodro . ; 
4 $e Platt: ve vulg. 5 ov) coni. Platt. _ 

* Viz., primarily testes and uterus, not the parts employed 
in intercourse ; these are mentioned separately, ll. 30-32 
below. See also 716 a 25-b 8. 

* Empedocles’. Aristotle seems to assume all through 
this discussion that according to Empedocles the fi 
mental difference between male and female was one of heat 

374 

ae 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

male and the other all the parts of the female, they 
were to be put into the uterus as though it were into 
an oven, the one which has a uterus into a hot oven, 
and the one which has no uterus into a cold one, then 
it follows that the one that has no uterus will turn 
out a female and the one that has a uterus a male. 
And this is impossible. So that we may allow that 
in this respect Democritus’s statement is the better 
of the two, because he is trying to find out what is the 
difference inherent in this process of formation of 
male and female, and endeavouring to state it, though 
whether he is right or not is another matter. Yet 
indeed, if heat and cold were the cause of the differ- 
ence of the actual parts,* then those who hold the 
other view ® ought to have stated this, because, one 
might say, this is tantamount to making a statement 
about the process of formation of male and female, 
since it is in these parts that the evident difference 
between the two lies. And also, if you start from 
this principle,* you have your work cut out to prove 
the cause of the process of formation of these parts, 
and to show that it necessarily follows that when the 
animal is cooled the part called the uterus is formed 
in it, but that when it is heated it is not formed. 
The same may be said about the parts which serve 
for intercourse, since these too differ, as has already 
been stated. 

Further, male and female twins are often formed 
together in the same part of the uterus. This has 

- and cold (see above, 1. 13), and that this had little or nothing 

to do with the difference of the sexual organs. But it seems- 
impossible that Empedocles could have meant anything else 
than that heat and cold were the cause of the difference of 
the sexes, including that of the distinctive organs. 
© i.@., of heat and cold. 
375 

ARISTOTLE Life 

764 a ; ain 
35 ixavads TeBewprKapyev ex TOY tan ar a — 

rots Lwotokodar, Kal ev rots melois Kal ev ‘rots - 
iyOvow: mepl av et He ta) ouvewpdrcet, edAdyws 
764 b ensieg: dig THY aitiay etry, et & éwpakds, 
dromov 76 ért vomilew airiay elvar oat 7HS. bordpas 
Copearyse.  wuxpornta’ audw yap av eyivero 
7 Ondrea 7 dppeva, viv S€ todr’ Wats besiuids Lev 
ovpBaivor. st hasebar 
Aéyovti re Ta a Svcomacban Tod ‘yu oe 
5 (ra pev yap ev TO appevi dnow elvar Ta ay 

T@ Ojrer, 86 Kat THs GAAjAwv dpiAlas enubrpctr) 
Sereeeie Kal THv TovovTwY Sinpjabat TO péyeBos 
Kat yiveaar avvodov, add’ od dia Ew 7 a pla 
GAAG mrepi pev THs Tovadrns airias [Tod rile 
Tax’ ay ein TroAAd A€yew* 6AwWSs yap eoiKev 3 ‘Tpdm0s 
10 THs airlas mAacpaTwSys clvar. et 8 gor TmeEpt 
oméppatos ovTws €xov wortep big orgs <ipy- 
Kéres, Kal pur’ dd Tavtds dmépyerar pune? ddws 
TO amo Tob appevos Tapéexet Tots ywopevors bAnv 
pndepiav, Kal mpos todrov Kal mpos Anpédxpirov, 
15 Kat «lt. tis GdAXos ovTw Tvyxdver A€ywv, cpoiws 
aTravTnTéov. ovTe yap Sieomacpévov evdeyeTar TO 

1 secl. Platt, qui post Qeppaciay supra transfert, 

® See quotation, 722 b 12, ie b 17 and context. 
» For péyebos =oadpa, ef. G. & C. 321 b 16; and 765 a 13 

376 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

been amply observed by us from dissections in all the 
Vivipara, both in the land-animals and in the fishes. 
Now if Empedocles had not detected this, it is under- 
standable that he should have made the mistake of 
assigning the cause he did ; if on the other hand he 
had detected it, it is extraordinary that he should still 
continue to think that the cause is the heat and cold 
of the uterus, since according to his theory the twins 
should both turn out male, or both female ; whereas 
in actual fact we do not observe this to occur. 

Also, he says that the parts of the creature which 
gets formed are “ torn asunder ’’*; some, he says, are 

‘in the male and some in the female, and that also 

explains why they desire intercourse with each other. 
If so, necessity requires that the physical substance ® 
of these parts ° as well as of the others is “ torn 
asunder “ and that a junction takes place, not that 
the difference is due to cooling or heating. However, 
discussion of a cause of this sort might well prove 
lengthy, as the whole cast of this cause seems to be 
a product of the imagination. If on the other hand 
the truth about semen is as we have actually stated— 
i.e., that it is not drawn from the whole body and 
that the secretion from the male provides no material 
at all for the creatures which get formed—then we 
must take up our stand against Empedocles and 
against Democritus and against anyone else who 
maintains this position, because (a) it is impossible 
below. péye#os thus means something which has size, i.¢., 
a physical body or substance. Empedocles, says Aristotle, is 
inconsistent in saying (a) that the physical substance of the 
parts is present as such in the parents to begin with, and 
(6) that the formation of the sexual parts is due to the action 
of heat and cold. 
© Viz., testes and uterus. 

377 

ARISTOTLE)! i4gn 

oda Tob onéppwatos* elvar, ro ev ev T@ OHA TO 
& ev 7@ dppen, xabarep *EpredoxAjs gnow eiméy 

\ 

GAAa dSi€oTacTar peddwy dvars, 1 pew ev 
avdpos .. ., aria 

~ our’ ef € ExaTépov Trav dmoxpwopevor, TD “pec 
20 TL LL€pos aAXov Hépous yiveoGau, TO [ev Gade 
5’ dppev. dAws b€ Td ye THY TOD épovs ee 
/ ~ a / \ \s : . 
Kpatycacav trovety OyAv BéArLov. pev a pt 
ppovricavra TO Deppov aitiaobar pdovov, TO pe 
ovpPaivew dpa Kat 77 Tob aidotiou popbny € enka 
detrau Aoyou mpos TO ovvaxodovbeiy adel tadr 
25 dAAnAas. <i yap OTL ovveyyus, Kal TOY Aouneav 
Exacrov edt opiwy akoAovbeiv: éTépw yap ETEpoVv 
> \ ~ / a of a\y./ 7 4 \ 
eyyds TOV vikwvTwY, WoTe dua OAAY 7 av Hv Kat 
Th payrpt cous, 7 dppev Kal T@ Tatpl. ert drorroy 
kal TO pdvov rabr otecba Sdeiv yiyveoton TA 
popia, Kal p47) TO GvvoAov peTaBeBAnKEvae ip 

1 +00 omépparos velit secludere Platt. 

4 See above, note on HEyebos, Ls % 

» Perhaps ‘‘ of the semen * should be deleted. 

° Of, 722 b 12. 

4 This is Democritus’s view. | Empedocles had said that 
each parent supplied only half the tale of the parts; 
Democritus said that each parent supplied a full tale of 
parts. See also note on pangenesis, 721 b 9. 

® i.e,, one sexual part over the other; see 764 a 10, 11. 

 i,e., the conformation of the ei employed i in intercourse 
as well as the conformation of the uterus: in all cases they 
both exhibit a difference from the corresponding basti in 
males, the penis and the testes respectively. 

9 ¢.g., why no individual is found having uterus and. penis. 

378 

; 
+ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

that the physical substance * of the semen ® exists 
“torn asunder,’ one part in the male and the other 
in the female, as Empedocles alleges— 

But torn asunder waits 

_. The substance of the limbs; part is in man’s .. . ° 
and (6) it is impossible that a complete tale? of parts 
is secreted off from each of the parents and that a 
male or female embryo is formed according as one 
part prevails over another part.’ Considering the 
matter generally : To hold that the superiority of one 
part prevails and that this is what makes the embryo 
female is certainly better than saying that heat alone 
is the cause without having stopped to think about 
it ; but the fact that at the same time the conforma- 
tion of the pudendum as well / is different requires an 
explanation to show why these parts are always of a 
piece with each other.’ If the answer is “‘ Because 
they are in close proximity,’ then every one of the 
remaining parts ought to be all of a piece as well,” 
since while the parts are gaining the mastery * any 
one of them is close to any other, so that on that 
showing all the characteristics should go together, 
i.e., the offspring, if female, should also take after its 
mother, and if male after its father.’ Besides, it is 
fantastic to imagine that these parts alone can be 
formed, without the whole body also having under- 

*® i.e., as well as the sexual parts; ¢.g., if the offspring has 
sexual parts resembling those of its father—i.e., male ones— 
then it ought to resemble its father in all its other parts too. 

* This refers to the “* prevailing ’’ mentioned above, |. 21, 
etc. y 

i i.e., the offspring should take after the parent whose sex 
has determined its own, and take after it not only in respect 
of sexual parts but in all other respects as well. But of 
course this is not borne out by the facts. 

379 

764 b 

765 a 

30 

35 

ARISTOTLE | | | 

Kal _padora Kat mp@rov TAS preBas, mept_ ds ws 
mepl droypagiy TO odpa mepixerrat TO TOV cap- 
K@v. ds ov dia THY dorépav eVAoyov yeveoBa 
TOUS Twas, adda. paAAov bv eéxeivas THhv boTépav* 
drr050x7) yap aipards TWOS Exdrepov, TMporepo. s 
7 TeV prcBav. thv S€é Kiwodcav apyiv dvayKatov 
ael _Tporépav elvac Kal THs yeveoewus airday TO 
mou elvai Twa. ovpPaiver pev obv 4 diadpopa 
TOV pep@v to’twy mpos adAnAa Tots OyAeou Kat 

Tots dppeow, GAN’ odk apxny oinréov ove” airiay 

Ht 

i0 

elvat TavTnY, an’ érépav, Kav et pen Bev” droKpi- 
verat omépj.a. pare amo tod OyjXeos nt” amo TOO 
dppevos, GAN’ drrws 84 more ovvioratat [Td omréppa} 
TO yeyvopevov. 

¢ > / ‘ ‘ vs / ¢ bq 

O 6 avros Adyos Kat pos Tovs A€yovras TO 
juev dppev amo Tav belvav <lva To de OAAv do 
TeV apioTep@v damp Kal mpos *EpsedoxAda Kat 
T™pos Anjpoxprrov. cite yap pdeplay vAnv oup par 
AeTat TO appev, odfev av Adyouev ot A€yovTes OUTWS* 
wy ‘ / 4 , c / > 
eite Kal ovuPaAreTar, Kabdrep haciv, opolws avay- 
Kaiov dmavrav Kal ™mpos Tov ’Erredoxddous Adyor, 
os Sropiler TO OAAv Tos TO dippev Oeppornre Kal pou- 
xXporyre THS dorépas. ot 5€ 76 adTo TOOT” mrovobot, 
tois deEvois Kai Tots apiorepots dpilovres, dp@vTes 

1 secl. Platt: 7d xdnua coni. A.-W. . 
2 rodro PSYZ*, om. Bekker per errorem. 

@ See 716 b 2 ff. and 766 a 24 ff. > Cf. 743 a 2, n. 

° This is the statement of the general rule of which the 
foregoing is an example; Aristotle makes a similar criticism 
(of Empedocles) for putting the cart before the horse at RAG 
640 a 20 ff., e.9., ayvoay . . « OTL 70 TOLoay TpOTEpoV BrApxev: 
the whole context is apposite. 

@ oupBaiver: it happens xara cvpBeBnkds, not xa’ adro: it 

380 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

gone a change,* and first and foremost the. blood- 
' vessels, on to which the fleshy structure of the body 
has been applied all round, as on to a framework.” 
And it is reasonable to suppose not that the blood- 
vessels have been formed to be of a particular charac- 
ter on account of the uterus, but rather that the 
uterus has been so formed on account of them, since 
although each is a receptacle of blood in some form, 
the blood-vessels are prior to the uterus; and the 
motive principle must of necessity be prior always 
and be the cause of the process of formation in virtue 
of possessing a particular character.‘ So then, this 
difference of the sexual parts as between males and 
females is a contingent phenomenon “: we must not 
look upon it as being a “ principle ”’ or a cause : this 
function is fulfilled by something else, even though 
no semen at all is discharged either by the female or 
by the male and whatever the manner may really be 
by which the forming creature takes shape. 

‘The same argument which we used against Empe- 
docles and Democritus holds good against those 
-who allege that the male comes from the right side 
and the female from the left *: thus if the male con- 
tributes no material at all, then those who take this 
view are of course talking nonsense ; if on the other 
hand it does contribute something, as they assert, we 
have to counter them in the same way that we 
' countered Empedocles’ argument which draws the 
line as between male and female by reference to 
the heat and coldness of the uterus. They make 
the same mistake as he does, i drawing the line by 

is an “‘ accidental,”’ not an *‘ essential,’’ characteristic.. For the 
sentiment, see 766 b 2 ff. 
* e.g., Anaxagoras ; see 763 b 33. 

381 

765 a 

ARISTOTLE 1D 

Svapepovra TO OAAv kal TO dppev Kal Hopiots dhous, 
dv bia Tu” airiav draptev Tois €K TOV apiorepav, 
Tots 8 eK TOV oebeay ovx dmrdpter TO o@pa TO 
15 THs dorépas ; av yap EADn peev pi (oxa de tobTo 
TO HOpLov, eorar OFjAv ovk éxov borépav Kal  Gppev 
exov, av ton: [ere 5° drrep elpyra Kal mporepov, 
ara al Ondo € ev TO debi Héper Tijs dorépas Kal 
dppev ev TO dprorep@ kat dudw ev TO avr@ Hépet, 
20 Kal Toot ody 6 OTL drag adda. meovdis, 7 7 TO dppev 
pev év tots defvots, TO OAAv S ev Tots _apiorepois- 
ovx ATToOv Sé auddrepa yivera ev Tos defvois]. : 
TapamAnotiws b€ TWes TETELOLEVOL TOUTOLS etal Kal 
Agyovow as Tov de€vov Opyw amodovpevois H TOV 
apiorepov ovpBaiver Tots dxevovow appevoroKetv 
25 7 Ondvtoxeiv: oUTwW yap Kad ANewpdvns edeyev. 
emi Te TOV EKTEMVOLEVEY Tov erepov dpxw TO avbTo 
TobTo cupPaivew Twes paow, odK adAnOA A€yovres, 
aAAa pravTevdpevot TO OvpPnodpevov ex THV eiKo- 
Twv, Kal mpoAapBdavovtes ws ovTws exov mpi 
ywopevov oUTWS Weiv, ért 8 dyvoodvres ws ober 
30 ovpBdrrcerat mpos Thy yeveow Tis dppevoyovias 
Kal OnAvyovias TO. pope Tadra Tots Cwous. tovrov 
dé onpetov ott moAAa THV Cawv adra te OnAea Kai 
dppeva €or, Kal yevva Ta prev OyArea Ta 8 appeva, 

1 i 70 dppev. . . yiverar &v Tots deEvois secl. Platt; om. 

x; credo equidem etiam ér 8 é7ep huc usque secl., nam 
argumento aliena ; cf. 764 a 1. 

* Lit., “* body of the uterus,’ drawing special attention to 
the fact of its physical existence: ef. uéyebos above, 764 b 7. 

®’ This sentence, which has nothing to do with the argu- | 
ment, must be deleted. 

© Leophanes is quoted by Theophrastus, De caus. plant. I1. 

382 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

reference to right and left, although they can see 
for themselves that male and female differ in fact by 
_ the entirety of the parts concerned. By what cause, 
then, will the uterus* be present in those which 
come from the left side but not in those which come 
from the right? Supposing dne comes (from the 
left) without having got this part, there will be a 
female without a uterus—or if it so chance, a male 
with one! [Again, as has in fact been said before, 
a female embryo has actually been observed in the 
right part of the uterus, and a male one in the left 
_ part, and both male and female in the self-same part, 
_and that not once but several times over; or the 
male one on the right side, and the female on the 
left, and no less both are formed on the right side}.° 
There are some who are firmly convinced of a similar 
_ view to this, and maintain that males who copulate 
with the right or left testicle tied up produce male 
or female offspring respectively : this used in fact 
to be maintained by Leophanes.‘ Some allege that 
the same occurs in the case of those who have one 
testis excised. This statement is untrue, and is a 
mere piece of guesswork on their part. They start 
from probabilities and guess what will occur ; they 
prejudge that it is so before they see it happen. 
Added to which they do not know that these parts 
of animals contribute nothing at all to generation so 
far as producing male and female offspring is con- 
cerned; and a proof that this is so is that many 
animals, although they are themselves male and 
female and generate male and female offspring, 

4.11; and the fact that in Aétius’ Placita V. 7.5 (Dozogr. 
420 a 7) he comes between Anaxagoras and Leucippus may 
give a rough indication of his date. 

383 

ARISTOTLE) ft § FAS 

set Opxets ovK exovra., Kabdmep To. Pa exovra. m08as, 
olov 76 TE Tay ixObwv yévos Kal TO TOV Ohewv. — 

35 To pev obv Deppornra Kal buxpdéryta a tan 

ole Bar TOO dppevos Kat tod OxjAeos, Kal TO mai 

765 b dmdiprow dé trav Se€v yivecOar 7 Ov dapi- 
oTEpav, exer Twa Aoyor: Deppdrepa yap ah 5 cEud, 

Too oedparos TOV dpiorep@v, Kal TO onepya. 76 

ETE LLEVOV Oeppdrepor, ToLodrov 5€ TO ouveotds, 
YOVYLESTEpOV dé 7d ovveotos padov. — dAAa. Xiav 

5 TO Aéyew ottawa méoppwhev eorw drrecbau Ti 
airias, det 8” Sre pahiora mpoodiyew ex Tov évdexe 

pLevev eyes T@y pur ay aitiwv. ee ae 

Tlepl pev oby dou Te Tob ow LaTos. kai “TOV 

popiwv, tt TE EKaOTOV, €oTl Kal Sud. ru * airiay, el 

para mporepov ev €répois. aA’ émrel TO appev Kat 

10 70 OFjAv Si@piorar Suvdper rwi Kai advvapia (rd 

pev yap Suvdpevov mérrew Kal ovmotavas Te Kal 
ekkpivew omépua €xov THY apxnV TOO eldovs appev 

dey s dipx7y od TH Touadrny €€ Hs domep v i 

T™pwrnv, eav T ev alt@ éav 7 ev dary Toor. 
15 duvnrat Troveiv: TO Se Sexdpevov HF dSvvarody 3 

yi 

te PY: om. vulg. . 

® See 716 b 14 f. 
> Thus the semen which comes from the iat side will be 
hotter. ¢ Cf. above, 747 a 5 ff 
24 And therefore, of course, capable of producing bial 
¢ Compare the method described in Physics, 184 a 10 ff. — 
* In the Parts of Animals and in the first book of the 
Generation of Animals. 
9 Dynamis: see Introd. § 30. ‘ , oi 

384 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

possess no testes—as is the case with the animals 
that have no feet, e.g., the tribes of fishes and 
serpents.* 

_ Now the opinion that the cause of male and female 
is heat and cold, and that the difference depends upon 
whether the secretion comes from the right side or | 
from the left, has a modicum of reason in it, because 
the right side of the body is hotter than the left ° ; 
hotter semen is semen which has been concocted ; 
the fact that it has been coneocted means that it has 
been set and compacted,° and the more compacted 
semen is, the more fertile it is.¢ All the same, to 
state the matter in this way is attempting to lay hold 
of the cause from too great a distance, and we ought 
to come as closely to grips as we possibly can with 
the primary causes.° 

~ We have dealt already elsewhere * with the body as Tne funda- 
a whole and with its several parts, and have stated 72. 
what each one is, and on account of what cause it is between 
so. But that is not all, for (1) the male and the p222"° 
female are distinguished by a certain ability 9 and . 
inability... Male is that which is able to concoct, to 
cause to take shape, and to discharge, semen‘ 
possessing the “ principle *’ of the “form ” ; and by 
“ principle ” I do not mean that sort of principle out 
of-which, as out of matter, an offspring is formed 
belonging to the same kind as its parent, but I mean 

the first motive principle, whether it is able to act 
thus / in itself or in something else. Female is that 

which receives the semen, but is unable to cause 

® Thus much has already been stated at 716 a 18 ff., but 
Aristotle now develops it more fully. 

* With this passage ef. the discussion at 724 a 29 ff. 

i i.¢., act as the cause of movement. 

° 385 

765 b 

VY 21 AVARISTOTIE PATIO 

ovuvioravar Kal exxpivew OAAv), ére €t' waca més 
epyalerat Oepud, avayKn [kat trav Cpe Ta Gppeva 
Tav OnAéwv Oeppdorepa eivar: Sud yap puxpsrnra 
Kal advvapiav mroAvaupiet Kara _ToTous Twas 70 : 
O7Av paMov. Kal €oTw avrTo robvavriov, onpetov 7) 
20 80 nvirEep airiav olovrai tiwes TO Oajrv Gepydrepov 
elvat Tod. Gppevos, dua THY TOV KaTapnviewy mpoeow~ 
TO pev yap afua Oeppov, 70 Sé mAeiov exov paQov. 
drrodapBdvovor 8¢ toro ylvecbar 76 dbos 8° 7 
drrepBoAnv aipwaros Kat Geppornros, dorep eWexé- 
HEvov, ala elvar av dpolws, dviep pLovov dypov — 
257 Kal THY xpdav aipar@des, Kal od, €dAarroy, 
ywopevov Kai Kabapdtepov tois edrpodotow. oi 
S Bomep TO KaTa THY KowWlav mepirrwya, TO 
mAetov Tod eAdrrovos olovTat onpelov elvat ep, As 
poaews HaMov. Kaito. Tovvaytiov €aTiv. waTeEp 
yap Kal ek TAs mparrns Tpogiis €k ToMAGjs oXiyov 
30 dmoxpiverat TO XpHoyLov ev TaAis mepl Tos: kaprrovs. 
epyaciais, Kal tédos odfev Hépos TO coxarov mpos 
TO mp@tov ARVs e€oTw, ovTw mdAw Kal ev TO 
cwpat. Siadexopeva Ta pepn Tals epyaciais, TO 
TeAevTaiov mdymrav puuKpoy e€ amdons yiverau? Tis 
TpPOPAs. Tobto d€ ev pev Tiow alud €or, €v 8é 
35 TLL TO dvdAoyov. X, ord 
"Eel 5€ TO pev Siveitan ove: B) aemaied exp 

1 rei 5€ Coni. Platt ; fort. ér ézei scribendum. 
? secl. Platt. 3 éxxpive. Bf. 

@ Cf. 725 a 17 f. 
386 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

semen to take shape or to discharge it. And (2) all 
concoction works by means of heat... Assuming the 
truth of these two statements, it follows of necessity 
that (3) male animals are hotter than female ones, 
since it is on account of coldness and inability that 
the female is more abundant in blood in certain 
regions of the body. And this abundance of blood is 
_a piece of evidence which goes to prove the opposite 
of the view held by some people, who suppose that 
the female must be hotter than the male, on account 
of the discharge of menstrual fluid: blood, they 
_ argue, is hot, so that which has more blood in it is 
hotter. ‘They suppose, however, that this condition 
oceurs owing to excess of blood and heat, as though | 
it were possible for anything and-everything to be 
equally blood if only it is fluid and bloodlike in colour, 
without, allowing for the possibility of its becoming 
_ less in quantity and purer in animals that are well- 
nourished. They apply the same standard here as 
they do to the residue in the intestine : if there is 
_ more of it they imagine that is a sign of a hotter 
nature. Yet in fact the opposite is the truth. Take 
_ a parallel case, that of fruit. Here the nourishment 
in its first.stage is large in quantity,* but the useful 
_ product resulting from it through the various stages 
_ of its treatment is small, and in the end the final 
result is nothing in proportion compared with the 
original bulk. So too in the body, the various parts 
_ receive the nourishment in turn at the different 
_ stages of its treatment, and the final product result- 
_ ing from all that amount of nourishment, is quite 
_ small. In some, this is blood; in others, its counter- 
part. 

Now as the one sex is able and the other is unable petermina- 
tion of sex 

387 

™ 

ARISTOTLE |) 0515 
765 b Ha , , 4 F \ ” 
vau' 70 Tepitr@pa Kabapdv, dmdon dé Suvduer Gpya- 
, At? ‘ a a > oA 4 ‘ 
166a -vov Ti €oTl, Kal TH xEipov amoredoven TadTO Kal 
TH Bédrwov, 7d 5€ OFAV Kat TO dppev, TAcovaxds 
Aeyouevov tod Svvaro6 Kal tod aduvarov, Tod- 
Tov avTikeita. TOV TpdTov, avdykn apa* Kal TO 
rile f isonet oan 
Ojrer Kal TH dppeve elvas dpyavov*- 7H pev o 
ein a ~ 3° G wll sy pe 1 Se Fe Pts 
52) voTepa TH O mepwweds eoTw. dpa do 
pvos tiv Te Stvayw amodiiwow EKdoTw Kat 
, » , \ Ca A VER fe ena | 
TO, Opyavov BéAtiov yap ovTws. 610 ExagTor ot 
TOTOL Ga Tals eKKpiocor yivovrar Kal Tats duvd- 
¢ ¥ 34 x cml Vl ta yw > 
peow, Wwomep ovr’, opis avev od0adluadv ovr” 
opbaruos TeActobrar avev dyews, Kal Koiria Kal 
10 KUoTis Ga TH SUvacba Ta TrepirTwpata yiveoOar. 
+ \ ~ 2 ya / : A mv 
ovros 5€ tod adrod e& ob Te yiwerat Kai av€erat, 
tobro 8 éorlv 7%) tpody, Exaorov av yivoito THV 
poplwy ex rovadryns vAns ts Sextikdv €or, Kal 
TOLOUTOU TEpiTTwpaTos. ET. dé yiverar madAW, Ws 
dapev, eK Tod evavtiov Tws. Tpitov dé mpos Tov- 
15 Tos Anmréov Stu elzep 7) POopa eis Todvavtiov, Kal 
TO PL) Kpatovjievov bo TOO Snpoupyobvros avayr 
petapdAAew <is Tovvavtiov. Tov’twy 8 droKeEt- 

e 

1 éxxpivas vulg. (€xxpivar O>*): exxpiverac PSYZ (exit X): 
yiveoOa coni. Btf.: 76 secl. A.-W. . 

2 dpa quod conieceram O” exhibet* (ergo XZ): yap E*, vulg., 
seclusit Platt: od» Aldus, A.-W. (sed dvayxatov coni. A.-W.). 

3 dpyavov PSYZ*; dpyava E*, vulg. 

4 ov7’ P: ov@’ 4 vulg. 

@ j:e,, here *‘ able’? means ‘can do it better,”’ “ unable” 
means ‘‘ can do it less well.” 12 

> Cf. 116.a 23 ff. 

¢ Of. 716 a 32, and H.A. 493 b 9 “‘the part between the 
thigh and the buttock is the perineos.” 

388 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

to secrete the residue in a pure condition ; and as in the 
there is an instrument for every ability or faculty, for °™""” 
the one which yields its product in a more finished 
condition and for the one which yields the same pro-. 
duct in a less finished condition ; and as male and 
female stand opposed in this way (“able ” and “ un- 
able ” being used in more senses than one ®) ; there- 
fore of necessity there must be an instrument ” both 
for the male and for the female ; hence the male has 
the perineos ° and the female has the uterus. Nature 
gives each one its instrument simultaneously with its 
ability, since it is better done thus. Hence each of 
these regions of the body gets formed simultaneously 
with the corresponding secretions and abilities, just 
as the ability to see does not get. perfected without 
eyes, nor the eye without the ability to see, and 
just as the gut and the bladder are perfected simul- 
taneously with the ability to form the residues. Now 
as the stuff out of which the parts are formed is the 
same as that from which they derive their growth,? 
namely the nourishment, we should expect each of 
the parts to be formed out of that sort of material 
and that sort of residue which it is fitted to receive. 
Secondly, and on the contrary, it is, as we hold, 
formed in a way out of its opposite. Thirdly, in 
addition, it must be laid down that, assuming the ex- 
tinction of a thing means its passing into its opposite 
condition, then also that which does not get mastered 
by the agent which is fashioning it must of necessity 
change over into its opposite condition. With these 

@ For this distinction between the grades of nourishment, 
see 744 b 32 ff. 

* Thisis explained at length at 768 a1 ff. The whole of the 

present passage should be read in conjunction with the later 
and fuller discussion. See also 766 b 15 ff. 

389 

ARISTOTLE! !'1/ 11490 
hg peeve lows av 789 padrov ein pavepov- be ip 
airiav yiverat 70 pe BAA 70 8 dppev. drav yap 
‘pn KpaTH 7 dpx7), pnde Surqrat mépar ov evdecay 
20 Bepporntos pnd aydyy ets TO iBvov elSos 76 adrod, 
ddd. tabrp rr OH, avdyKn eis ‘robvavriov th 
Badrew. evayTiov d€ TO dppeve TO OnAv, Kal TAY 
i] TO Hey appev 70 de OAdv. énel. 8° exer Hinge 
> 
€v Th Suvdpet, € exes Kal TO Opyavov Suadepor: wor 
els TOLovTOV petaBadrer, évos Se poptov erixalpov 
25 wetaBdaAAovros ohn 4 avaTacts rob Cepov, Trohd TO 
<iBet Srageper. opav & ecoTw emt Tav edvodxov, 
ot év0s jopiou ammpwbévros Toaobrov efadddrrover 
THS dpxaias popdijs kad pu pov éMeirovat’ Tob 
OjAcos Thy idéav. tovrou 8 airiov 6re eva Tov 
poptev apyat elow: apyis dé KwJelons Todd 
30 dvdr peBioracbat TOV aodovbovvruy. 
Ei ody TO jLev appev apyn Tis Kal atriov, goal 
8° dppev 7 Suvarat tt, Ondv Se F ddvvaret, THs Se 

Suvapews Spos Kal THs dduvvapias 76 memTuKOV elvat 

1 avrod Peck (cf. 766 b 16, 767 b 17): adrod vulg. 

2 g\deizovar P: Aeizovar vulg. 

@ The.+:f movement ”” derived from! the capil the male 
“principle.” See 767 b 17 ff. 

» i.¢., male. 

i Cf. the terminology of this and the two following chapters 
‘with Hippocrates, 7. 8:airys 1.25 ff. The following examples 
may be given: I. 28 (vi. 502 Littré) ny emiKparyon TO apoev 5 
ibid. 70 OAv pevodras Kat Siaxpiverar es GAAnv potpav; I. 27 
(vi. 500 L.) Scadverae es THY pelw rake. 

a See, 6.915 716.a 27 ff., 766 b 2 ff. 

© i.e., the condition of possessing the female generative 
organs, 

t Cf. above, 716 b 2 ff., and 764 b 28 ff. 
° Aristotle seems to hayer between asserting and denying 

390 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. t. 

as our premisses it may perhaps be clearer why and 
by what cause one offspring becomes male and another 
male. Itis this. When the “ principle ” ¢ is failing _ 

to gain the mastery and is unable to effect concoction 
owing to deficiency of heat, and does not succeed in 

the material into its own proper form,’ but 
instead is worsted in the attempt, then of necessity 
the material must change over into its opposite con- 
dition.“ Now the opposite of the male is the female, 
and it is opposite in respect of that whereby one is 
male and the other female.? And since it differs in 
the ability it possesses, so also it differs in the instru- 
ment which it possesses. Hence this is the con- 
dition * into which the material changes over. And 
when one vital part changes,’ the whole make-up of 
the animal differs greatly in appearance and form. 
This may be observed in the case of eunuchs; the 
mutilation of just one part of them results in such a 
great alteration of their old semblance, and in close 
}2pproximation to the appearance of the female. The 
eason for this is that some of the body’s parts? are 
’ iples,’’ and once a principle has been “ moved ” 
i.e., changed), many of the parts which cohere * with 
t must of necessity change as well. 

Let us assume then (1) that “the male” is a The 
Jprinciple and is causal in its nature ; (2) that a male Wtmate 
is male in virtue of a particular ability, and a female sex is the 

emale in virtue of a particular inability ; (3) that the "* 
ine of determination between the ability and the 
'}nability is whether a thing effects or does not effect 

‘ 

that the doe arts, as distinct from the sexes, are “* prin- 
siples * ; position is made-clear by the passage 

» * Are of a piece with it’: cf. 764 b 24, 25. 
- 391 

766 a 

766 b 

[A MARISTROTER (Ts 245: 

2) py wemTiKOY THs boTaTns Tpodhs, 6 ev pev Tots 
evaipows alua Kadetrar ev 8€ Tois GAXows TO avd- 

r , Se \ ” ’ > tt 5 A” UAE RS 
35 Aoyov, TOUTOV O€ TO GALTLOV EV TH APXN KGL TW 

popiw 7T@ €xovtTe ‘thv THs vos Pepyorntos 
apy7v, avayKatov dpa ev Tots évaipous ovvioracbae 

/, Vn ” ‘ Qn &, & eA 5 
Kapdiav, Kat H appev Eoeabar 7 OFAV TO ywopevov, 
év 8€ Tots dAAais yéveow Cofs) brdpyes TO BRAD Kat 
\ o¥ des: Pate dee Ve: € \ ek 
TO appev TO TH Kapdia avdAoyov. 7 pev odv apxT 
~ / y' ” \ < red 4 AA > 
tod OynAcos Kal adppevos Kal 7% aitia avrn Kai ev 
TovTw eoriv. OnAv S 7dn Kal dppev early drav 
éxyn Kal Ta pdpia ols Siadheper Td HAV Tod appevos- 
~ ay POND 
ov yap Kal? dt.otv pepos appev odde OAV, womTep 

00d op@v Kat axodov. Lanntiwel 
’AvadaBovres Sé mdAw Adyopev® Ot. TO peV 

i ¢ / / int bal Sa Mix 

omépia w7oKeiTa TepitTwUA Tpodis ov TO Eaxa- 
tov. (€syatov d€ Aéyw TO mpds EKaaTov Pepopevov. 

10 5 ‘ \ om” K 4 A ~ / ‘ Ae 

LO Kal €ouKe TO yevrva@jrevov TO yevvyncavte’ ovlev 
‘ / > > ¢e / ~ Ul > ~ bal 

yap Suahéper ad’ éxdorov THv popiwv asmeAbeiv 7 

mpos ExacTov mpoceAbeiv, dpOdrepov 8° ovtws.) dia- 
déper 5€ TO TOD appevos oméppa; Ort EXEL ‘apxnv 

1 fois) Platt, P*. 2 réywpuev P. 

@ The bloodless animals. of 

» Cf. note on 763b 25. This extremely important para- 
graph gives Aristotle’s view on the seat of the distinction of 
sex, and its main conclusions must be borne in mind through- 
out his discussion of this subject. It also serves to elucidate 
the apparent contradictions in his statements elsewhere (¢.g., 
716 a 28, 764 b 36, 766 a 28) as to whether or not the sexual 
parts are to be considered “ principles.” 

392 - 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

_ concoction of the ultimate nourishment (in blooded 

animals this is known as blood, in the bloodless ones 
it is the counterpart of blood) ;. (4) that the reason 

for this lies in the “‘ principle,” ze., in the part of the 

body which possesses the principle of the natural 
heat. From this it follows of necessity that, in the 
blooded animals, a heart must take shape and that 
the creature formed is to be either male or female, 
and, in the other kinds * which have male and female 
sexes, the counterpart of the heart. As far, then, as 
the principle and the cause of male and female is 
concerned, this is what it is and where it is situated ; 
a creature, however, really is male or female only 
from the time when it has got the parts by which 
female differs from male, because it is not in virtue of 
some casual part that it is male or female, any more. 
than it is in virtue of some casual part. that it can 
see or hear.? 

To resume then‘*: We repeat that semen has been Consequent 
posited to be the ultimate residue of the nourish- ?iterenee im 

ment. (By “ultimate” I mean that which gets car- of sexual 
ried to each part of the body—and that too is why *™* 

the offspring begotten takes after the parent which 
has begotten it, since it comes to exactly the same 
thing whether we speak of being drawn from every 
one of the parts or passing into every one of the 
parts, though the latter is more correct.?) The 
semen of the male, however, exhibits a difference, 

* The following paragraph is a short recapitulation, with 
additions, of the main points of the preceding argument, 
765 b 8—766 b7. (For the use of ééxerra with participle, 
cf. 778 b 17 rodvde Cdov txdxerrat dv.) 

# See Bk. I. 721 b 13 ff., and especially the conclusion of 
that discussion, 725 a 21 ff. 

393 

766 b 

ARISTOTLE (}ci0 4s) 

ev €avT@ Tovavrny olay Kweiv [Kat év TO Cow} Kat 
Svamérrew Thy eoxdryy Tpopiy, TO be 700 Oipreos 
15 UAnv pdvov. Kparijoav pev obv eis abro— ayet, 
Kparn bev 8 els TobvavTiov peTaBdrAer %) ets : POopdy. 

eva tov dé TH dippeve TO OAAv- Ondy 8€ TH a Ae ; 
7 8 

Kal Th, poxpornrt THs aiparuchs pane 
vous éxdory TOV TEPLTTLATOY ar Swor 70 
dEKTLKOV Hoptov. TO O€ omepya, TepiTTwpia, Todro 
20 be Tots peev Oepporépots Ka dppect. Trav. evatpienv 
eVoyKov TO An ber, 610 To Sexrucd Hepa. TOpot 
TavUTNS THS MepitTwaEds €ioL Tots dppeow Tots 
dé. O7Acou 80 dmresioy. mj Oos. OtLaTUKOV (dearép- 
yaorov yap), wore Kal Hoptoy dekTLKOV dvayaiov 
elvat Tl, Kal elvau Tobro dvdpovov Kal HEyebos 
25 exe. ite) Tis borépas Touadry 7 pou €ortv. 
TOUTW be TO OAAv Suadéper TO popien Tod dppevos. 
Aud Tiva pev obv airiay yiverau TO pev bai TO 
eS dippev, eipnrar. 
exppta de Ta ovpPatvovra tots ecipypevors. 
Ta Te yap véa OnduTéKa paGAAov Tav axpalovrwy, 

I 

— 

lL xal v7ted léw et mox 70 d¢ Tob OxjAcos Aqv povov suspicati 
sunt A.-W. ; pro kai ev 7 Caw coni, A.-W, ev 7 OijAer, secl. 
Btf. ; pro 76 8¢ rod OxjAeos GAnv pdvov habet E et Sacere ipsum 
(sc. ultimum cibum) transire ad matricem feminae. in femina 
autem est creatio embrionis. cf. 765 b 10 seqq. uf a 

* The passage following has been corrupted. It should 
probably read: ‘a principle of such a kind as to set in 
movement and to concoct thoroughly the ultimate nourish- 
ment, and to cause it to pass into the uterus of the female ; 
whereas the formation of the embryo takes place in the 
female.” Cf. the parallel passage above, 765 b 10. 

® There is no subject to this verb in the Greek ; at 766 a 18 
it is ‘‘ the principle”; at 767 b 17 it is “ the movement 
derived from the male ’’—where also Aristotle explains that 

394 

4 

Te 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1-n. 

inasmuch as the male possesses in itself a. principle 
of such a kind ¢ as to set up movement [in the animal 
as well] and thoroughly to concoct the ultimate 
nourishment, whereas the female’s semen contains 
material only. If {the male semen) gains® the 
mastery, it brings (the material) over to itself ; but 
if it gets mastered, it changes over either into its 
opposite or else into extinction. And the opposite of 
the male is the female, which is female in virtue of 
its inability to effect concoction, and of the coldness 
of its bloodlike nourishment. And Nature assigns to 
each of the residues the part which is fitted to receive 
it. Now the semen is a residue, and in the hotter of 
the blooded animals, ?.e.,the males, this is manageable 
in size and amount,° and therefore in males the parts 
which receive this residual product are passages; in 
females, however, on account of their failure to effect 
concoction, this residue is a considerable volume of 
bloodlike substance, because it has not been matured; 
hence there must of necessity be here too some part 
fitted to receive it, different from that in the male, 
and of a fair size. That is why the uterus has these 
characteristics; and that is the part wherein ‘the 
female differs from the male.¢ 

We have now stated the catise why some creatures 
are formed as males, others as females. 

And our statements are borne out by the facts. II 
Thus : Young parents, and those which are older too, Te theory 

rted 
tend to produce female offspring rather than parents by the 

it is all one whether we say “‘ the semen,” or ‘‘ the movement 
which causes the growth of each of the parts,” or “* the move- 
ment which originally sets and constitutes the fetation.” 
Cf. 771 b 19 ff. 

© Because it is more compact ; see aboye, 765 b 3. 

@ Cf. 738 b 35 ff. 

395 

ARISTOTLE | 14) 
766 b 

30 Kai TO. mpeaPirepa* Tots Lev yap ovmw téevov 
TO Deppov, tois 8° droXeime. Kat TA Lev dypdTepa 
Tav owpdrov Kal yuvarcucdrepa OnAvydva wor, 
Kat TO. oréppara Td. Oy pa. TOV ouveoTnKOT@. 
mdvra yap Tatra yivera 80 évdevay bepporntos 
puoikns. 

35. Kai 70 Bopetous dppevoroKety, HaMov 7 a voriows 
{Sia Tadro _ cup Baiver: byporepa yap TO. oopara 
votiots,)* ware KQL TEPLTTWLATLKWTEPA. TO be 
metov TepirT@pa Suomen rorepov" dio Tots pev 

767 a dppeow bypérepov TO oméppa, Tais de yuvaréiv 7 
TOV Karapnviey Exkpuots. 

Kai 70 yiverdau d€ Ta KaTapynvia Kara® dvow 
Plivovrwy TOV pnvav padov Sud nv avTiy airiay 
ovpBaiver. ux porepos yap 0 xpdovos obros Too 

5 pnvos Kal dyporepos Sud ay pbiow Kal THY a70- 
Acupuv Tis oehnvns: 6 pev yap Twos ev ody TO 
eviauT@ mrovet Xepava Kad B€pos, 7 7 dé oehnvn € ev TO 
uyvi. [rodro 8 ob Sid Tas Tpomds,. aAAd, TO bev ad- 
Eavopevov ovpBaiver Tob dwTds, TO be dbivovtos.|* 
dact dé Kai of vopets diadepew mpos OndAvyoviav 

10 Kal appevoyoviay od p.dvoy eav oupBaivn THY oxelav 
yiveobar Bopeiots 7) vorious, aAAa Kav dxXevopeva 

1 +a mpeoBitepa P: ynpdoxovra waAdor vulg. 

2 supplevi; quia corpora sunt humida quando ventus 
movetur meridionalis X. 

3 xara P: 7a xara vulg. 

4 seclusi; om. £: ovpBaiver om. SY, pnvos pro dwrds S. 

* Cf. H.A. 573 b 34. 

” Cf. the effects of the south wind described in Hippo- 
crates, 7. ipis vovcou 13, 7. -dépwv bddrwv témwy 3. 

© See 777 b 24 ff. 

¢ This explanation sounds like a gloss. Its meaning is 

396 

eee 

a 

ES 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. n. 

which are in their prime ; the reason being that in 
the young their heat is not yet perfected, in the older, 
it is failing. Also, parents which are more fluid of 
body and feminine tend to produce females ; this is 
true also of fluid semen as opposed to that which has 
“set”; all these things are due to a deficiency of 
natural heat. 

_ Also, the fact that when the wind is in the north? 
male offspring tend to be engendered rather than 
when it is in the south (is due to the same cause : 
animals’ bodies are more fluid’ when the wind is in 
the south) so that they are more abundant in residue 
as well. And the more residue there is, the more 
difficulty they have in concocting it; hence the 
semen of the males and the menstrual discharge of 
the women is more fluid. 

Also, the fact that the menstrual discharge in the 
natural course tends to take place when the moon 
is waning ° is due to the same cause. That time of 
month is colder and more fluid on account of the 
waning and failure of the moon (since the- moon 
makes a summer and winter in the course of a month 
just as the sun does in the course of the whole year. 
[This is not due to its turning at the tropics ; no, 
the one occurs when the moon’s light is increasing, 
the other when it is waning.*}). Also, shepherds 
say that it makes a difference so far as the gen- 
eration of males and females is concerned not 
only whether copulation occurs when the wind 
is in the north or in the south, but also whether 

that whereas summer and winter result from the “ turnings ” 
of the sun, viz., the solstices, the ‘‘ summer” and “ winter ”’ 
of the moon are not due to the moon’s “ turnings,” but to its 
waxings and wanings, which are completely independent of 
its ““ turnings.” 
397 

767 a 

ARISTOTLE 

Barer mpos voTov 7 Bopéav: ovTw juKpav eviore 
pomy aitiay yiveoOar tis puxpdtnros Kal Dep- 
poTnTos, Tadra dé Tis VEverews. 
Atéornke peev ovv ohws pos adAna TO TE OAdv 
15 Kal TO dppev mpos THY appevoyoviay Kat OnAvyoviav 
dua Tas eipnyévas airias, od pHv aAAd Kal det 
oupypetpias mpos GAAnAa: mdévTa yap Ta ywopmeva 
Kata téxvnv }) pvow Adyw Twi e€otw, TO dé Oeppov 
Alay pev Kparodv Enpaiver ta bypd, odd Se ed- 
Aetrov od auvicrnow, Gadd det mpos 70 Snpsoupyov- 
20 pevov Exew TodTOV Tov’ TO péaov Adyov: «i Sé 7), 
Kabdmep év tots efouevous mpockder fev TO TAciov 
mop, ody eer 5€ TO EAaTTov, apdorépws 8€ cup- 
Baiver pr) TeAciodobar TO ywopevov, ovrw Kal ev 
Th TOO appevos piker Kal Tod Ondreos Set THs cup- 
petpias. Kat Sida tobro. moAois Kai modAais 
25 ovpPaiver wer’ adrAjAwY pev 7) yevvay, dvalevx Petar 
d€ yervdv, Kal dré pev véois ore 5€ mpecBurépots 
ovat tavtas yiveoBar ras trevavtidceis, opolws 
wept Te yeveow Kal ayoviay Kal appevoyoviay Kal 
Ondrvyoviay. Ssuadeper S5é€ Kal xywpa ywpas eis 
Tatra Kal vdwp vdatos dia Tas avras aitias: 
30 Towa yap tis 7) Tpody yiverar pddvora Kal Tod 
cdpatos 7 Sidfeows did Te THY KpGow Tod Tept- 

1 rodrov tov PZ1* : robrov om. vulg. 

* Cf. H.A. 574. a 2. 

® Cf. 723 a 30, 772 a 17, 777 b 25, and Introd. §§ 39 f, 

y With the following passage, ef. Hippocrates, 7. aépwy 
bddrwv Térwy, Chh, 1-8 (ii. 12 ff. Littré), id. a. dvairns LI. 37-39. 

398 

ee 

se 

Se ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. nu. 

the animals face north or south while they are 
copulating *; such a small thing thrown in on one 
_ side or the other (so they say) acts as the cause of 
_ heat and cold, and these in turn act as the cause 
* of generation’ . 

Male and female, then, differ generally with regard Importance 
to each other in respect of the generation of male and % 
_ female offspring on account of the causes which have 

been stated. At the same time, they must stand in 

a right proportional relationship to one another,? 
_ since everything that is formed either by art or by 
nature exists in virtue of some due proportion. Now 
if “ the hot ”’ is too powerful it dries up fluid things ; 
if it is very deficient it fails to make them “ set ” ; 
what it must have in relation to the object which 
is being fashioned, is the mean proportional, and 
unless it has that, the case will be the same as what 
happens when. you are cooking ; if there is too much 
fire it burns up your meat, if there is too little it will 
not cook it—either way what you are trying to pro- 
duce fails to reach completion. The same applies to 
the mixture of the male and the female : they require 
the right proportional relationship, and that is the 
reason why it happens that many couples fail to effect 
generation with one another, but if they change 
partners they succeed ;' and also that these opposi- 
tions occur sometimes. in young people, sometimes 
among those who are older, both with regard to 
failure and success in generation and also with regard 
to the generation of male and female offspring. 
¢ Also, one country differs. from another in these Effect of 
respects, and one water from another, on account of “™**- 
the same causes, for the quality of the nourishment 
especially and of the bodily condition of a person 

399 

0 
Tuppmerpia. 

./ ARISTOTLE Ii 

767 a é 
eoT@tos aépos Kal Tv elowvrwr, péAvora de dud 

THY Tod BdaTos Tpopny toto yap meiarov 
clopepovrat, Kal ev mdoiv €ott Tpopr) TOUTO, Kal 
év tois Enpots. 86 Kat Ta atépapva Bara Kal — 
‘ \ Axel 3 ’ A ek Sh s a 

35 uypa Ta pev arexviay moved TA Sé OndAvToKiav. 
Wl Ai & adral airiaw Kal tod ra pev eoukoTa ‘yive- 
o8at Tots rexvebcact Ta SE 27) coukdra., Kai Ta. PRY 
767 b marpl 7a de Lntp, Kata Te OAov TO oopa Kat 
Kara jLoptov Exagror, Kat paddAov. adrois ue Tois 
mpoydvors, Kal tovrous j tots Tuxobo1, Kal Ta pev 
appeva wadXrov TO mrarpt Ta 5€ OyjAea TH parpi, TO 
58 oddevi TOV ouyyevany, dpws 8° avOparw ve TWh, 
Ta.8 od avOpdirw. tiv idéav' GAN dn Tépare. 
Kal yap 6. #9) €ouK@s Tots vyoveBiow 707 Tpomtov 
Twa 7épas €oriv" mrapeKBEBKRe yap 4 gvous év 
TOUTOLS EK TOD yevous TpOmov Twa. apx7 de mpi 
76 OfAv yivecba® Kai pr dppev. GA avdrn pev 

> / fond , a A 4 A ta ~ 
avaykaia TH pdoer, Set yap odlecbar To yevos THY 

a \ A =~ ‘ \ ” > 
10 Keywpiopevwy Kata TO OAV Kal TO appev* ev- 
Sexyouevov dé pz) Kparetvy more TO appev® 7 dia 

, “a ond n” ya ‘ a 7 4, 4 
veoTnTa 7) yhpas 7 Sv aAAnv twa airiay Tovadrny, 

1 nv idéav] rut SX * yiveoBa P: yevéoba vulg. 
3 76 dppev Rackham : rod dppevos vulg. 

* See Introd. §§ 39 f., and Hippocrates, z. diairns I. passim. 
For another reference to kpGovs in connexion with the “ sur- 
rounding air,” see 777 b 7. 

» Cf. Hippocrates, 7. dépwy tddrwv tomwv, ch. 4 (ii. 22, 2 ff. 
Littré). 

¢ Cf. 775 a 15: the female is a ‘“‘ deformity,” though one 

400 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. un. 

depends upon the blend ¢ of the surrounding air and 
of the foods which the body takes up, and especially 
upon the nourishment supplied by the water, since 
this is what we take most of, water being present as 
nourishment in everything, even in solid substances 
as well. Hence hard, cold water in some cases causes 
barrenness, in others the birth of females.” 

The following things are due to these same causes. III 
Some offspring take after their parents and some Besem- | 
do not; some after their father, some after their parents and 
mother, as well in respect of the body as a whole as “*°?*"* 
in respect of each of the parts, and they take after 
their parents more than after their earlier ancestors, 
and after their ancestors more than after any casual 
persons. Males take after their father more than 
their mother, females after their mother. Some take 
after none of their kindred, although they take after 
some human being at any rate ; others do not take 
after a human being at all in their appearance, but 
have gone so far that they resemble a monstrosity, 
and, for the matter of that, anyone who does not 
take after his parents is really in a way a mon- 
strosity, since in these cases Nature has in a way 
strayed from the generic type. The first beginning 
of this deviation is when a female is formed instead of 
a male, though (a) this indeed is a necessity required 
by Nature,’ since the race of creatures which are 
separated into male and female has got to be kept 
in being*; and (6) since it is possible for the male 
sometimes not to gain the mastery either on account 
of youth or age or some othgr such cause, female 

oduced in the normal course of nature (@ozep dvamnpi 
cooucy). See Introd. § 13. : A Scone 

# This is an instance of a necessity required by the Final 
Cause ; see 731 b 25—732 a 3. 

401 

767 b 

: ‘ARISTOTLE (311 / ARO 

dvdiyien yiveoBau OnAvroxiay év Tois S@ous. 70 8 
Tépas ovK dvayKatoy 7pos my EVEKA TOV kal np 
Too 7éAous airiay, ava Kara ovpBeBnkds. dvay- 
15 Kaiov, emrel aiy x apxiy evredev Set AapBdvew. 
edmémToU meV yap ovons Tis. TepiTTmaEws €v ToIs 
Karapnviots TAs omepparruchs, Kal” adriy Toujoet 
THY popdry » q) TOO Gppevos Kivnots. \(r0° yap yordyy 
Aéyew 7 Kivnow Thy avgovoay é ExaoTov TOV poplov 
20 odfev Suaheper, ovde Hv avovoay 7) Thy ovvioTaoay 
ef a apxis” 6 yap | avTos Adyos Tis KUTEws. ) aore 
Kparodoa’ pev appev Te moujoes Kal od OAAv, Kal 
EOLKOS TO year GAN’ od TH pr pe: pi) Kparnoaca® 
dé, Kal” dmoiav ay a Kparion dvvapiiv, Thy ér- 
Aewbiv move? Kar’ adriy. dey eS éxaorny Sivapuy 
TOVOE TOV Tpomov: TO yevv@y eotiv od _bovoy. dppev 
25 d\Ad Kal roiov dppev, ofov Kopiaxos 7) Lwxparys, 

Kal od pdovov Kopioxos €oriv adda Kal dv pwrros. ; 

Kal TOOTOV 57) TOV TpOTrov Ta pev eyydtepov Ta Be 
Troppdrrepov drrdpxet TO yervavre, Kao YEWITIKOY, 
aAN’ od Kara, ovpBeBniés, otov «i Yeap pares. 6 
30 yervav 7 vyelTwv tivds. del 8 ioxder mpos THY 
/ A rey \ \ Ye c 
vyeveow pGAAov 70. dtov. Kal To) Ka’ ExacTov. 6 
yap Kopicxos Kal avOpwrds éoti Kal igor aan’ 

4 Kparoboa Peck : Kparovans vulg. 
® xparijcaca Peck : xparjoav vulg. 

* This is an instance ofta necessity enforced by the nature 
of the Matter; see below, 768 a 2—b 33. For these two 

modes of necessity (here distinguished as €vexa rov and xara | 

ovpBeBnxés), cf. P.A. 642 a 33, and Introd. §§ 6 ff. 
> Cf. 766 a 18, 766 b 15, 771 b 22, 772 b 32. 

402 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. um. 

offspring must of necessity be produced by animals.? 
As for monstrosities, they are not necessary so far 
as the purposive or final cause is concerned, yet per 
accidens they are necessary, since we must take it 
that their origin at any rate is located here. Thus: 
If the seminal residue in the menstrual fluid is well- 
concocted, the movement derived from the male 
will make. the shape after its own pattern.’ (It 
comes - sey same thing whether we say “ the 
semen * “the movement which makes each of the 
parts ‘grow ” ; or whether we say “makes them 
grow’ or “constitutes and ‘sets * them from the 
beginning *—because the logos of the movement is 
the same either way.) So that if this movement © 
gains the mastery it will make a male and not a 
female, and a male which takes after its father, not 
after its mother; if however it fails to gain the 
mastery, whatever be the “ faculty "in redpect of 
which it has not gained the mastery, in that’ “faculty ”’ 
it makes the offspring deficient. _“ Faculty,’ as 

applied to each instance, I use in the following sense. 
The generative parent is not merely male, but in 
addition a male with certain. characteristics, e.g., 
Coriscus or Socrates ; and it is not merely Coriscus, 
but in addition a human being. And it is of course 
in this sense that, of the characteristics belonging 
to the generating parent, some are more closely, 
some more remotely his, qua procreator (not qua 
anything else he may be per accidens, e.g., suppos- 
ing he were a good scholar or somebody’ s next-door 
neighbour); and where generation is concerned, it 
is always the peculiar and individual characteristic 
that exerts the stronger influence. Thus: Coriscus 
is both a human being and an animal; but the 

403 

767 b 

768 a 

35 

5 

10 

ARISTOTLE 

eyyurepov Tob idiov TO * avOpasros 7) 7) TO Te yerva 
Se Kal TO Kal? Exaorov Kat TO yévos, adra paMov 
TO Kal! Exaorov" Tobro yap oT ovoia* Kal? TO 
ywoprevov yiverar peev Kal Trouov Te, dpa (be° 708¢€ 
Tt, kal Too?” 7 odaia. Sidrrep. amo Tov Suvd, ‘cov 
mdpxovow at KW}GELS ev Tots Omreppacr TavT@v 
TOV TOLOUTWY, Suvdyer be Kat TOV mpoysveav, 
paAdov dé Tod éyyuTepov ael Tov Kal? Exaorov 
TWOS" A€yw Se Kal? EKaOTOV. TOV Kopioxoy wal 
TOV Lewxparny. érrel ro eClorarat may ovK cis. TO 
TUXOV, aAN’ eis TO VTUKELMEVOV, Kal TO ev TH yevéoet 
ya) KpaTovpevoy dvaryKatov efioraobat Kal yiveoBae 
TO avTikeiwevoy Kal? ip Sdvapuy ovK exparnoe TO 
yevvav kal Kwobv. €av pev obv 7%) appev, OyjAv 
ylverat, eav dé 7 Kopioxos 7 y Lwxpdrns, ob TO 
marpl eguKds aAAa TH pnrpl yiverat* avrikerras yap 
@omep TO odws* marpt paATHp, Kal TO al? ExaoTov 
yervavtt 7 Kal Exaotov yervaoa. spoiws dé Kal 
KaTa Tas €xopevas Suvdpers’ del yap els Tov éxo- 
frevoy pretaPaiver padAdAov tHv mpoyovwv, Kai émt 
1 70-P: 6 vulg., om. S. * kai P: Kal ydp vulg. 
3 dua d¢€ Rackham: dAda vulg. 
4 ddws P, totaliter X: ddAw vulg. 

4 Cf. 731 b 34, and below 768 a 1; and see the definition 
of ovcia given in Cat. 2 a 11, and the examples cited, 6 zis 
avOpwros, 6 Tis tmmos. There are of course other usages and 
meanings of odaia. Cf. Introd. § 16, App. A § 18. 

> Viz., individual, human being, animal, etc. 

° Loses and alters its character ; degenerates. The force 
of efioracfa can be seen from the phrase efiornar cal dbeiper 
zi dvow (Eth. Nic. 1119 a 23) 5 of. G. & C. 323 b 28, Phys. 
261 a 20 (ris dvcews, Tis ovoias, efiorac8a), and 725 a 28 
above. 2 Cf. above, 766 a 15. 

404 

ee 

a 

— : 

ton 

Jagat Sq. pened. 

t 

: 
A 
fh 
¥ 

i 

: 

E . 
p 

ee a” ae 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. m 

former characteristic stands closer to what is peculiar 
to him than the latter does. Now both the indi- 
vidual.and the genus to which it belongs are at 

work in the act of generation; but of the two the 
individual takes the leading part, because this is the 
really existent thing *; the offspring also which 
is formed, though of course it is formed so as to 
possess the generic characteristics, at the same time 
comes to be a particular indiyidual—and this, again, 
is the really existent thing. Therefore, it is from 
the “faculties” of all such things as these® that 
the movements which are present in the semens 
are derived, potentially even from (the faculties) of 
earlier ancestors, but more specially of that which on 
each oceasion stands closer to some individual ; and 
by individual I mean Coriscus, or Socrates. Now 
everything, when it departs from type,’ passes not 
into any casual thing but into its own opposite ; 
thus, applying this to the process of generation, the 
(substance) which does not get mastered must of 
necessity depart from type and become the opposite? 
in respect of that “ faculty ’ wherein the generative 
and motive agent has failed to gain the mastery. 
Hence, if this is the “ faculty ” in virtue of which the 
agent is male, then the offspring formed is female ; 
if it is that in virtue of which the agent is Coriscus 
or Socrates, then the offspring formed does not take 
after its father but after its mother, since, just as 
“ mother ” is the opposite of “ father” as a general 
term, so also the individual mother is the opposite 
of the individual father. The same applies to the 
** faculties ”’ that stand next in order, since the off- 
spring always tends to shift over to that one of its 
ancestors which stands next, both on the father’s side 

405 

768 a 

\ ARISTOTLE! S94 aS 

marépeov Kat ert’ pnrépov. everot 8 ai pev ép- 
epyeta TOV KUnoEov, at dé duvdper, ae fo pev at 
TOO yevrv@vros Kal t&v Kaborov, ofov avOperrov Kat 
Cobov, Suvdper de at Tod OyAEos Kai T@v Tpoyovev. 

15 peraBdArer puev ouv efvordpevoy — pos Ta dvrucet- 

jeva, Avovrat dé at Kujoers at yi nite eis 
Tas eyys, olov 7 Too YevvOvTos av 2 fi Kinots, 
eAaxlorn Svadopa peraBaiver els Ty 700 TaTpos, 
SevrEpov S eis THY 708 mdamou: Kat todrov 81) TOV 
TpdTrov [Kat emi Tov cippevev Kal emt rev. Ondevdv} 

20 7), THs yevvesons ets Ty THs LITPOS, eav de pa 

tb 
or 

eis Tabrny; eis tHhv THs THONS: Sup cos d€ Kai 

emt TOV dvaibev. 
MdAtora pev obv mépuxev 4 dppev kat F rarip 

dua Kparetv Kal Kparetobau puKpa yap 1) dvadopa, 

wot ovK epyov ajLa. oup Privat dupdrepa 6 yap 
LexKparns avijp Towode Ts.) S10 « as ‘éml TO TOAD 

5 Ta pev dppeva 7 marpt eoucey, Ta be Oreo 7H 

pytpl, Gua yap ets apdw exoraas eyéveto, avri- 

emt P: om. th ; 2 secl. A.-W. 
6 yap... 7s secl, A.-W.: dvip om, S. 

a Aristotle now introduces the distinction between ¢&icra- 
ofa Kai peraBdAdrew (“departing from type and changing 
over ”’) and Avecda (™ relapsing ”): as will be seen, the 
result of the former process is that the embryo acquires a 
characteristic opposite to that of the original movement (this 
process has been clearly described already); the result of 
the latter process (not so far described) is that the embryo 
acquires a characteristic which belonged to one of its ancestors. 
(The ‘explanation of these two processes is given below at 
768, b.15 ff.) 

» The semen, the movement derived from the male parent. 
Cf. 766 a 17. 

¢ See 768 a 2 above. 4 

406 

—=— ee 

ee ee 

( 
H 
t 
if 
{ 

Set ~ egg a 

oO ee or; 

re ow 

- GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 11. 

and the mother’s. Some of the movements (those 
of the male parent and those of general kinds, e.g., of 
human being and animal) are present in {the semen) 
in actuality, others (those of the female and those of 
ancestors) are present potentially. * Now when (a) it ® 
departs from type,’ it changes over into its opposites ; 
but when (6) the movements which are fashioning 
the embryo relapse, they relapse into those which 
stand quite near them; for example, if the move- 
ment. of the male parent relapses, it shifts over 
to that of his father—a very small difference—and 
in the second instance to that of his grandfather. 
And in this way too [not only on the male side but 
also on the female] the movement of the female 
parent shifts over to that of her mother, and if not 
to that, then to that of her grandmother ; and so on 
with the more remote ancestors. » . 

(1) Usually the natural course of events is that 
when (the movement of the male parent)? gains 
the mastery—and when it is mastered—it will do so 
both gua male and qua individual father,’ since the 
difference between the two (faculties) is a small one, 
and so there is no difficulty in their both coinciding 
(for Socrates is a man who, while (a) he: has the 
characteristics of a class,f (6) is also an individual). 
Hence for the most part males. take after their 
father—and females after their mother, since a de- 
parture from type takes place in both directions ’ 

# See above, 766 b 15. 

¢ Care must be taken to distinguish the use of “‘ father ” 
eat (a) to the male parent qua a particular individual, 
and (6) to the father of the male parent. 

4 i.2.,is ‘‘ male.” For rowade, rovocdi, cf. Met. 1077 b 20 ff. 

2 7.2., from “‘ male’ into “‘ female,” and from “ father ” 
into ‘‘ mother.” 

407 

768 a 

768 b 

30 

35 

nr 

ARISTOTLE 6 

KeUTaL dé 7 peev dppevt. to Ondrv TH de marpt 
u] LATNP, 7 3 exoTaous els TAVTUREL LEVEL. édy & 
7 pev amo TOO dippevos Kparnon Knots, 4 8 aa 
Tob Lwxpdrous L) Kpatynon, 7) airy pev exe, be 
nae TOTE oupPaiver yivectau Gppeva TE. patel 
eouxdTa Kai OjAcea matpi.. eav d¢ AVOGow ai Kwy- 
ces, Kal i) poev dppev pein, 7. d€ Tod Uwkpdrovs 
Av0h, <is Tiv Too TaTpOS, €oTat appev TH mdmmw 
€0LKOsS 7 Tov adAAwy Twi Tv dvwbev mpoysvev 
[kara TOOTOV Tov Adyov]. r KparnBevros* dé Hh 4 dppev! 
OnAv & corat, Kal €ouKds padvora. pev Th apt, eay 
dé Kad avTn Av8p a) KWOK, enrpt LNT pos 7. ay 
Twi tav avwbev & éarae u) Opowdrns KaTa TOV avTov 
Adyov. 6 8 adros tpdmos Kal emi tay popiwv- 
Kal yap T@v popiwy Ta pev TH Tatpl Coxe TroA- 
Adkis, Ta SE TH prpi, Ta SE TOV tpoydver ticiv- 
eveto yap Kal TOV popiwy ai ev evepyeia Kiwhoets 
at d€ duvdper, Kabamep clpyrau moAAdis. Kallorov 
d¢ Sei AaBetv drobeceis, play pev THY epnuevny, 
OTL. €vevor TOV KUnoEwy at ev Suvdper ai 

evepyeia, aAAas S¢ dvo, OTe Kpatovpevov pey €&- 
iorara. «is TO avTuKeipevov, Avdpevov dé. cis. THY 
exonevnv kivnow, Kat Artov pev Avdpevov eis, THV 

1 om. PS; ; seclusi. . Kparnbévra Ya 
* post appev addunt codd. 7} (7 om. P) BAAv, Tov mpoyoveny 
Twi €ouxds PYZ; ; amplius xparnfeions S¢ Kai (kai om. Z) rijs 
Tob mpoyovov Kwhoews PSYZ. 

@ See 768 a 3. 
» i.e, the movement derived from that particular indi- 
vidual male. © Cf. 772. b 36. 

408 

ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. m1. 

simultaneously, and. the opposite of ‘ “male ” is 
“female” and the opposite of “father” is “mother,” 
departure from type always being into opposites." 
But (2) if the movement that comes from “ the 
male” gains the mastery and the movement that 
comes from. Socrates. does not, or the other way 
round, then the result is that male offspring taking 
after their mother are formed and female ones 
taking after their father. Supposing (3). the move- 
ments relapse: if (i) the male “ faculty ” stands fast 
but the movement from Socrates” relapses into that 
of his father, then the offspring will be male and 
take after its grandfather or some other more remote 
ancestor [according to this principle]; if (ii) the 
male-faculty gets mastered, the offspring will be 
female, and usually. will take after the mother ; 
but supposing this movement also relapses, it will 
take after the mother’s mother or some other more 
remote ancestor on the same principle. Precisely 
the same scheme holds good with the various parts 
of the body ; very often, of course, some parts take 
after the eats and some after the mother, and 
others after some of the ancestors, since the move- 
ments belonging to the parts ° as well are present 
in (the seminal substance), some of them in actual- 
ity, some potentially, as has often been stated. We 
must lay down as general principles that which we 
stated just now, for one (viz., that some of the 
movements are present in (the seminal substance) 
potentially, others in actuality), and also two others : 
(a) that which gets mastered departs from type and 
passes into its opposite; (6) that, however, which 
relapses passes into the movement next to it in 
order: if it relapses a little, into the movement 

409 

Absence of 
family 
resem- 
blance. 

768 b 

“1 ARISTOTLB FTA TAD 

10 eyes: page d€ «is Tv Topper pov. ros 8 
oUTws buy xconran wate pnbevt gbuebe zav oi 
ketwv Kal ovyyevdv, adda Acirecar oe _Kouoy 
pidvov Kat elvat dvOpwaov. todrov 8’ airvov, dre 
maow adKodovlet tobro Tois Kal” Exacrov* Kabddov 
yep 6 Paet Rak 6 be Deoxpdrns. manip, Kal a 

15 ATHP HTS TOT i, Tav Kal’ Exaotov. 5 

Airwov d€ Tob rai AvecIar Tas KWHoEs OTL TO 
Trowobv Kal mye bo Tob mdoxovros (lov, 78 Tepe 
vov apPAdvverar bd TOO TEvoMevov Kat 76 Oep- 
pativor gdyerar bo Too fepuamopavan, Kai dAws 
TO KwWodv ate Too «mpwrov avruxwelrat om 

20 Kivynaw, olov To WOodv avrwOeiral mas ah! 
OAiBerar to OABov: eviore dé. Kal  Bhws- zo 
paAAov 7 eroinoev, Kai epvyOn pev TO feece 
eHeppavOn dé To ydyxov, dre prev odfev Totjoar, 
Ore dé Hrrov 7 mabdv: cipnrar Se mepi adrdv ev 
Tots epi Tob Tovey Kal MROX EY Suempropevors, ev 

25 rolous drdpyer TOV ovTwY TO TroLely Kat igh roe 

i 

e€ioratar S€ Td mdoxov Kat od ti Pl 4) 8 
ZdAcubw ourapeds Too METTOVTOS Kal KWPOUYTOS,, y 
Sua ARVs Kai duxypdtnra tod meTTOmevov. Kai 
Svopilopevov: TH pev yap Kparodv TH de ob: Kpa~ 

« The species is ‘* consequent a to every individual; ef. 
Topics 128 b 4 ds yévous dvtos Tod ‘del dxkoAovBobvros. 
® See G. & C. 324.a 31 ff. 
© Not extant... But see G. & C. 324 a 33 ff. 
4 Cf. 166 b 15. 

410 

PETG lig 

. 
i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 11. 

which is close by, if more, into. that which is 
further removed. In the end, they become. so 
confused that the product does not take after any 
of its family or kindred, and all that remains is 
what is common to the race—2.e., it is just a human 
being. The reason for which is "that all particular 
individuals are accompanied * by this characteristic : 

since “ human being ”’ is general, whereas Socrates 
who is the father, and the mother whoever she may 
be, are to be classed as particular individuals. 

(1) The reason why the movements relapse is that The 

the agent in its turn gets acted upon by that upon 
which it acts (e.g., a thing which cuts gets blunted and 
by the thing which is cut, anda thing which heats 
gets cooled by the thing which is heated, and, gen- 
erally, any motive agent, except the “ prime mover,” 
gets moved somehow itself in return,” e.g., that which 
pushes gets pushed somehow in return, and that 
which squeezes gets squeezed in return; sometimes 
the extent to which it gets acted upon is greater 
than that to which it is acting—a thing which heats 
may get cooled, or one which cools may get heated, 
sometimes (a) without having acted at all, sometimes 
(6) having acted less than it has been acted upon. 
These matters have been discussed in the treatise 
on Acting and being acted upon,” where it is stated 
in what sorts of things acting and being acted upon 
occur). (2) The reason, however, why that which 
is acted upon departs from type and does not get 
mastered is either (a) deficient potency in the con- 
cocting and motive agent, or (6) the bulk and cold- 
ness of that which is see concocted and articulated ; 

since (the motive agent),? gaining the mastery at one 
place but not at another, causes the embryo that is 

411 

mechanics 
of < oteate 

peraBadAecy. 

Uneven 
develop- 
ment, 

ARISTOTLE )' 1/1 4.19 
768 b 

Tobv Tovet troAvpopdov «7rd ouviardpevor, -olov éml 
30 TaV abAnrav oupPaiver dua. TV modupaytay* dua 

mAAOos ’ yap Tpopijs ov Suvapevns THs pioews Kpa- 

Tei, wor dvddoyov avtew Kal Svavepew” Spoias* 

Thy tpopiy,” dMAoia yiverau Ta (HEPN, Kal oxeddv 

eviol’. ovtws ware benbev Eourevat TO mporepov. 

mapamAjovov Sé ToUTH Kat TO spoon 70 Kadov- 
35 jevov GaTupiar [kal yap ev Toure Oud pevparos 7 
‘avedpatos améntov Anos «is* dpia Tob mpoo- 
wtrov TOpEpTEgovTos tod fdov,> Kai oatdpov 
paiverar TO mpdawrrov.|" 

769 a Ava Tiva pev obv airiav OjAca Kal appeva yiverat, 
Kal Ta pev eoukdta Tois yovedor, OnAred te Orjreor 
Kat dppeva appear, Ta 8 dvdrradw, Onred Te TO 
maTpt Kal appeva TH pntpl, Kat dhws TO. pev Tots 
Tpoyovors courdra” Ta 8 ovbevi, Kal Tatra Kat Kal” 
dAov TO oGpa Kat TOv popiwy Exaorov, Sidpiorat 
mepl wavTwv. 

Eipjcaoe dé TWeS Tov duavordyev Kat _ erepa” 
mepl TouTwy, dia Tiv’ aitiav Spo, Kal avopou 
yiyveran Tois yovedow, dvo 57) TpoToUs Aéyover 
Ths aitias. €vio pev yap pacw, ad’ OPERA 

on 

1 Savéuew S, Aldus, Platt: Scapevew vulg. 

2 duoiws E: opotay vulg. 

® zpodny E, Aldus : popdjy vulg. * eis ra Aldus. 

5 rod beiciv} dddov Ldov O>*m, A.-W. in textu: Caov tov 
coni. A.-W.;. tov fort. Z1, dAov corr. fort. ipse Z+, dAdov 
rec. Z*. cf. Pol. 1302 b 39. 

§ corrupta et fort. secludenda; pro Kal yap . . . mpdcwrov 
quoniam accidit ex [con|descensu ad membrum maris cum 
vento generato ex cibo indigesto X. 

4 €ouxdra P: éowxe vulg. 

8 grepa Platt, quod causae . . . sunt aliae %: erepov uP: 
erepot vulg. 

412 

SE 2 coe SR kam email ait 
Y sins 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. in. 

taking shape to turn out diversiform. This is just 
what happens to athletes through eating an excess- 
ive amount; in their case, owing to the great bulk of 
nourishment there is, Nature cannot gain the mastery 
over it so as to bring about well-proportioned growth 
and distribute the nourishment evenly throughout ; 
the result is that the parts turn out ill-assorted, and 
sometimes even bear hardly any resemblance at all 
to what they were like before. Similar to this is 
the disease which is known as satyriasis ; [in this 
too, a large bulk of unconcocted flux or pneuma finds 
its way into-parts of the face of the animal, and in 
consequence the face actually appears like that of a 

satyr.]* 

‘We have now expounded the cause of all the follow- 
ing : why male and female offspring are formed ; why 
some take after their parents, female after female 
and male after male, and others the other way 
round, females taking after their father and males 
after their mother; and generally why some take 
after their ancestors and some after none of them, 
in respect both of the body as a whole and of each 
of its parts. 

Certain of the physiologers, however, have treated 
of these matters on different lines, explaining other- 
wise the cause why offspring are formed similar and 
dissimilar to their parents. The cause is presented 
by them in two ways. (1) Some say that the off- 
spring which is formed takes more closely after that 

* This sentence is probably a marginal note which has 
crept into the text; in any case it is corrupt, and “ uncon- 
cocted pneuma”’ is meaningless. Scot has no mention of 
animal or face; see critical note. The disease seems to be 
elephantiasis.— With b 30-37 however cf. Pol. 1302 b 35 ff. 

413 

769 a 

ARISTOTLE rary 

10 av erOn ome ppt mov, TOUT ‘vlyveoBas' paMov 
cotkds, opoiws mavtTi Te wav Kal Héper Bépos, ds 
amudvrtos ad’ éxaoTov TOV popiwy omépparos: av 
& icov €rAOn ad’ EKaTepov,, TobTo 5° ovderépy 

/ Ld 
ylyvecBar dpouov. ei dé Todr’ eoti peidos Kal jar) 
amo tTavTos dmrepyeras, SijAov ds odde Tis" Opowe- 

15 THTOS Kal dyopo.drnros aitiov av el TO Nexbev. 
evs b€ 71H aya Onhy pay matpt éouxds dppev dé 
pntpt €oukds, odk edmopws Svvavrar, Siopilew- of 

\ \ ¢ > lod / wn 4 
fev yap womep >EpumedoxAfjs Aéyovres 7 Anpo- 
KptiTos mept Tob OyjAcos Kal dppevos THY aitiay 
aAAov TpOmoV advvara Acyouat: ot d€ TH metov 

20 7) EAarrov amdvar amo Tob dppevos 7 OrjAeos, Kat 
d:a TOdTO yiyvecOar 7 pwev OHAV TO 8 appev, odK 

yiyy pev OF ippev 
n” ” > a / “ec / } ~ 
av EXOUe? dmodets at Tiva TACIT 76 Te Orv TO 
marpl €ouKos €oTat Kal TO appev TH pyTpl dua 
yap ¢Abety mAgov am dppor ep, advvatov. €Tt 
dé dua TW” aitiav €ouKds yiverau Tois mpoydvors ws 

Tome \ YW \ a > \ >, 19 9. oe 

25 él TO 7oAd' Kal Tots dzofev; od yap am’ €kewwv 
y ameAnAvber odBev Tob adppatos. dAdAa paAAov 
of Tov Aewmdopevov Tpomov A€yovtes TEpt THS OpoLd- 

\ > , \ = , Pn 
TnTos Kat TaAAa BéATLov Kai TodTO A€yovow. «tot 
yap twes ot dao tiv yovny piay obdcav olov 
mavoreppiav etval Twa ToAADv* wWorrep ovv* et Tis 

1 ds émi ro woAd fort. secludendum. 
2 > nan 
ovr] av S. 

® See 764 a—765 a. 
» ¢.g., Alemeon; see Diels 24 A 14. 

414 

. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. m1. 

_ parent from which the larger portion of the semen . 
comes, and. that the whole of the offspring takes after 
_ the whole of the parent, and part after part (this 
_ assumes that semen is drawn from each of the parts) ; 
_ if the same amount comes from each of the two, then, 
_ they say, the offspring formed resembles neither. 
_ But if this is untrue (as it is), z.e., if the semen is not 
_ drawn from the whole of the body, then, clearly, the 
_ reason they give for the similarity and dissimilarity 
_ of the offspring cannot be true either. Further, they 
_ eannot explain with any ease how it is that at the 
same time a female offspring takes after the father 
and a male offspring after the mother ;- for those who 
state the cause of male and female as ‘Empedocles or 
Democritus state it, make statements which on an- 
other score are impossible; while those who maintain 
that it all depends upon whether more or less semen 
comes from either the male or the female, and that 
this is why one offspring is formed as a male, and 
another as a female, these people, I am sure, are not 
in a position to show how the female is going to take 
after the father and the male after the mother, since it 
is impossible for more semen to come from both parents 
at one and the same time.. And further, for what 
cause is it that the offspring for the most part takes 
after its ancestors, even distant ones? Surely no 
portion at all of the semen has come from them, 
anyway. . (2) One more type of explanation of the 
resemblance remains to be mentioned, and those who 
adopt it make a better show all round, including this 
particular question. There are some who hold that 
the semen, though a unity, is as it were a “ seed- 
aggregate’ consisting of a large number of in- 
gredients ; it is as though someone were to mix and 

415 

769 a 

769 b 

30 

35 

Or 

10 

ARISTOTLE”: TPA AZAD 

Kepdcete moAAods xupods eis ev dy pons “Kare” 
evreb0ev AapBavor, [xat|' Sdvair” ay AapBdve ‘py 
igov Gael ag éxdotov, adW’ ore fev TOU “Towde 
mAgov OTe S€ TOD TOLOddE, OTE SE TOD. Ha AaBetv 
Tod dé unbev AaBeiv—robro oupPaivent Kal -emt Tis 
yovijs mroAupyods ovons” ag’ ob yap ay tov 
yevvesvToy mAciorov € eyyernrat, ToUTw yiveoBau 7 my 
popdry é€ouxds. odtos Sé 6 Adyos od aadjs perv 
kal mAacparias earl moAAayy, BovAerar Sé Kal 
BéArtov Aéyew pu) evepyeta dmrdpxew, adAa Kara 
dvvapuv, HV Aeyet mavoTreppiav> eKxeivas ig yap 

advvatov, ovTws dé Suvarov: Anigatl 

Od pqgdiov de obde TpOrrov eva. rijs airias dao- 

duddvtas Tas airias elmetvy wept mdvrwy, Tod TE 

yiveoBar Orv Kai appev, Kal bia Ti tO rev OFjAv- 

~ ‘ 4, ¢ A > LA ~ P , 
T@ Tatpt 7oAAdKis Gpovov TO 8 appev TH HTP, 
Kal mdAw Tihs mpos TOvs mpoydvous OpoLoTyToS, 

»” x A 43> PBad eX \ A \ f. 
éru 5€ dia Ti’ aitiay 6ré pev avOpwros Lev TOUTWY 

> ’ \ , €2. O14 a’ ” . 
5° ovfevi mpocdpowos, oTé 5€ mpotov ovrws ' TéAos 
ovde avOpwros adAa CHdov te povov dpatverar To 
yeyvopevov, & 81) Kal Aéyerar Tépara. 

Kai yap éyopevov tay cipnuevwy €or elmeiv 
mEept TOV TowovtTwv Tas aitias. TéAos yap THY juev 
Kujcewv Avowévwv, THs S bAns od Kparoupevys, 

/ ‘ / / ~ > > A aa lat 
pever TO KabdAov pddAvota: TodTo 8° e€aTi TO CHov. 

1 secl. A.-W. 2 cupBaive. PSYZ. 

* Because it can be restated in Aristotelian terminology, 
as he goes on to show. 

416 

a. 

_s 

‘ eel & 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. mm 

blend together a large number of juices into one fluid, 

‘and then take off some of this mixture ; in doing so 

__ he could take off not always an equal amount of each- 

i juice, but sometimés more of this one, sometimes 

_ more of that, and sometimes he might take some of 
one and nothing at all of another: So, they say, it is 
with the semen, which is a mixture of a large number 

t of ingredients ; and in appearance the offspring takes 

_ after that parent from whom the largest amount is 
derived. This theory is obscure, and at many points 

a sheer fabrication. At the same time, it aims at a 

more satisfactory * statement, viz., that this “ seed- 
_ aggregate ” is something that exists not in actuality, 
_ but only potentially, since it cannot exist in actuality, 
- whereas it can exist po 
Stillit is not easy, b y stating a single mode of cause, 
to explain the causes y of everything,_{1) why male 
and female are formed, (2) why female offspring often 
resembles the father and male offspring the mother, 
and again (3) the resemblance borne to ancestors, and 
further (4) what is the cause why sometimes the off- 
spring is a human being yet bears no resemblance to 
any ancestor, sometimes it has reached such a point 
that in the end it no longer has the appearance of a 
human being at all, but that of an animal only—it 
belongs to the class of monstrosities, as they are 
called. 

And indeed this is what comes next to be tieated Monstrosi, 
after what we have already dealt with—the causes of “* 
monstrosities, for in the end, when the movements 
{that came from the male) relapse and the material 
{that came from the female) does not get mastered, 
what remains is that which is most “ general,” and 
this is the (merely) “ animal.” People say that the 

P 417 

2 ST al 

769 b 

ARISTOTLEO TAS TAI 

TO dé yuyvopevov Kpiod Kedadjy daow 7 Bods Exew, 

15 Kal év Tots GAAois opoiws érépov Cobov, poayov 
‘mrados Kepadiv 7 mpoBarov Bods. tadra dé mdvTa 
oupBaiver pev dia Tas mpoeipnuevas airias, €oTe 
S’ ovfev dv éyovow, add’, éoukdTa. wovov:. O7Ep 
ylyverat Kal p47) TeTnpwuevwv. 810 moAAdKis ot 
oxwntovres cikalovot TOV py) KAA@V eviovs rods 

20 pev alyl dvodvri mop, Tous 8 ott Kupirrovte. 
dvovoyvopwv S€ Tis aviyye macas' eis Sto 7 Tprav 
Cobwv* dypers, Kal ovverePe mroAAdKis A€ywv.  OTt 
5° early advvarov ylyvecbar tépas Tovwwodrov, €Tepov 
ev érépw CHov, dnAotow of ypdvor THs KUncEws 
TroNd Siagepovres avOpwrrov Kai mpoBarov Kal 

25 KUvos Kal Bods: advvarov 8° exaotov yeveobar 7) 
KaTa TOUS oixelous xpovors. 

Ta pev ody todrov tov tpomov Aéyerat TaY 
Tepdtwv, Ta S€ TH. TroAvpEepH THY Popov exe; 
moAvroda Kal moduKépada yerdpevas 

Ildpeyyus 8° of Adyou THS airias kal mapamdyfovot 
TpoTov Twa elow ol TE Tepl TOY TEepdtwy Kal ot 

30 mepl TOV dvarnpeoy Cawv- Kal yap To tte 
avamnpia tis €oTiv. 

IV AnpoKpiros pev ovv “pajoe vyiyveoBau TO. répara 
Sua TO S¥0 yovas timrew,® THY Ev TmpOTEpoY Sp[Ly- 
cacav* tHv 8 vorepov, tKal® radrnv e€eAPodcar* 

mavras P. 

} tprav Cawy Ps Cébwv 7 rpidy vulg. 

(oup)ainrew Diels. 4 et non egredientem add. Gul. 

5 id’ Hs kal P (a quo et hanc egredientem Gul., teste Busse- 
maker). ® éeAodcay Diels. 

418 

1 
2 
3 

ee” a a ee ee Oe 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. ut.-1v. 
offspring which is formed has the head of a ram or 

an ox; and similarly with other creatures, that one 
has the head of another, e.g., a calf has a child’s head 
or a sheep an ox’s head. e occurrence of all these 

things is due to the causes I have named; at the 
same time, in no case are they what they are alleged 
to be, but resemblances only, and this of course comes 
about even when there is no deformation involved. 
Thus, humorists often compare those whose strong 
point is not good looks in some cases with a fire- 
spouting-goat, in others with a butting ram; and 
there was a physiognomist who in his lectures used 
to show how all people’s faces could be reduced to 
those: of two or three animals, and very often he 
carried conviction with his audience. It is however 
impossible for a monstrosity of this type to be formed 
(.e., one animal within another), as is shown by the 
gestation-periods of man, sheep, dog, and ox, which 
are widely different, and none of these animals 
can possibly be formed except in its own proper 
period. 

This, then, is one sort of “ monstrosity ” we hear 
spoken of. There are others which qualify for the 
name in virtue of having additional parts to their 
body, being formed with extra feet or extra heads. 

The account of the cause of monstrosities is very 
close and in a way similar to that of the cause of 
deformed animals, since a monstrosity is really a sort 
of deformity. 

Now Democritus * explained the formation of IV 
monstrosities thus. Two semens fall into the uterus, a 
one of them having started forth earlier and the other parts. 
later, fand the second when it has gone out goes 

@ See Diels, Vorsokr.® 68 A 146. 
419 

769 b 

770 a 

ARISTOTLE 4009 8S 

eAbeiv’ cis THY botépavt* Wore oupddecbar Kat émaA- 
Adrrew Ta opie. [rats e Opveow émet ovpPaiver 

35 Taxetav yiveoBae THv dxelay acl, TA T Oa Kal 

5 

10 

THY xpoay | abrav emaAAdrrew dnow. Se ‘OUp- 
Baiver ef év0s oméppatos TAciw yiveoBat Kal pods 
ouvovatas, OTTEp paiverar, BéXrvov [47) KbKre TEpl- 

Levan TApevTas THY ovvTopov Tois yap Touovrous 

padvor dvayKatov TOOTO. ovpBaiver orav, 
Siaxpuldow GAN dua Td. oméppara 2\Owow. vet 
bev obv airdoaobae det iy amo TOO appevos yovny, 
ToOrov dy Tov Tpdzrov ety . Aexréov" Sdws dé v 
Thv aitiav oinréov ev TH UAn Kal Tots ovviora- 
uevois Kujpaow elvat. 810 Kal yivovrat Ta TOLAdTA 
TOV Tepatwy ev pev Tots povordKois omdvia 
maprav, ev 5€ Tots troAvTéKots aGAAov, Kal padvor’ 
ev opvict, Tav 8° dpvibwy év rais adexropiow: 
avtTat yap moAuvToKotow, o¥ povov T@ TroAAdKis 
TiKTEW WOTEp TO TOV TEpLoTEepa@Y yevos, GAAd Kal 
T®@ mod\Ad dua exew Kuyjpata Kal maocav wpav 
> 7 / ‘ ‘ , ’ 
dyevecOar. Sdiudmep Kai moAAa Sidvpa tixrovow: 

1 edds pro eAbeiv BE. 

* loc. corrupt. monet Platt. quia duo spermata cadunt in 
matricem, et prius cadit unum sperma et permansit et nor 
exivit (et non egredientem habet Gul. vers.), deinde con- 
tinuatur cum secundo spermate remanente etiam in matrice, 
et sic, etc. X. 

3 seclusi. locum sensu carere monet Platt. pro dei Aldus 
habet adetie. credo haec de avibus dicta ex adnot. quae 

ad 770 a 9 seqq., al. locc., spectaverit irrepsisse; con eras 
717 b 29. 

* This sentence, as Platt points out, is corrupt. The 
general sense is clear. I have given Scot’s translation in 
the apparatus eriticus. 

420 

———— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. tv. 

into the uterus,j* with the result that the parts 
grow on to one another and get thrown into disorder. 
[In the case of birds, since copulation is a quick 
business with them always, the eggs and their colour 
as well, he says, get thrown into disorder.]® But if 
it is a fact that several offspring are formed from one 
semen and from one act of copulation, as is evidently 
the case, we should do better not to neglect the 
shortest route and go a long way round, since in cases 
of this sort it is absolutely necessary that this should 
happen when the semens have not been separated 
but proceed together.“ Now if we are really obliged 
to refer the cause to the semen that comes from the 
male, then, I suppose these are the lines on which we 
should make our explanation ; but from every point 
of view we ought preferably to hold that the seat of 
the cause is the material* and in the fetations as 
they take shape. And that too explains why mon- 
strosities of this sort, while they occur very seldom 
in animals that produce one offspring only, occur 
oftener in those that are prolific, and most of all 
in birds, and specially in the common fowl.’ This 
species is prolific, not only in laying eggs frequently, 
as the pigeon tribe does, but also in carrying many 
fetations at once and in copulating at every season 
of the year. Hence also fowls lay many twin-eggs, 

® This sentence (which may be a note on 770 a 15 ff.) seems 
to be from the same author as the interpolation at 717 b 29: 
the speed of birds’ copulation obviously was a favourite point 
with him, but it has nothing to do either with this passage 
or with that in Bk. I. In the present passage, birds are 
introduced later by Aristotle (a 10). 

¢ And this is a contingency for which Democritus’s ex- 
planation does not allow. @ Supplied by the female. 

* For monstrosities, see references, p. xi. 

421 

770 a 

2 AJARISTOPLE SITAR AMO) 

15 ouppverau yap da TO mAnoiov dA Awy elvac Ta 
Kunpara., Kabdaep evlore moAAa TOV TEpiKapmiov. 
tovtwr 8€ dowy pev av at A€KBou (Svopilovrat 
KaTa TOV dpéva, dvo yivovrat VEOTTOL Kexewptapevor, 
TepiTTov ovdev € EXOVTES” Oowv be cuvexeis KaL jun 
dveipyer pnbev, €Ky ToUTiy ot vEoTTOL | ylovrat 

20 Teparwodeis, oOo, pev Kal kepahiy peta EXOVTES; 
oxéAn dé TérTapa Kat mrépuyas, dia TO Ta pev 
avwlev €x Tob AevKod yiveofar Kal mpdrepor, 
Tapuevopmerns eK Tis AeKxifov Tis Tpodiis avtois, 
TO 5€ KaTw }Sptov vorepilew pier, Thy be Tpopiy 
elvar play Kal adiopiorov. 

"Hy be Kat opis. OUT AL Sucéhbaros Bud Tp 

25 abray aitlav’ WoToKEl yap Kat modvroxet Kal TobTo 
TO yevos. orravuarepov 8¢. 70 tepar@des én 
atra@v dia TO oxhua Ths borépas: orouxndov yap 
KeiTaL TO 7Anbos Tov @av dia TO pAKos adbris. 
Kal mépl Tas wedrras Kal rods odjKas ovdev 
yiverat ToLodTov’ év KEexwpltopevols ‘yap KUTTaptoLs 

30 6 TOKOS eoTl avTav. rept d€ Tas _ddexropibas 
tovvavtiov ovpPéePnkev, 4 Kai S7jAov ws ev TH bry 
THY aitiay bet vopilew TOV towovTwr: Kat yap 
tav. dAdwy év tos moAuTéKoLs parAdrjov. 80 ev 
avOpmimw FArtov- ws yap emt TO odd povoTdKoV 
€oTl Kal TeAcvoydvor, eel Kai ToUTwWY ev ols TOTOLS 

35 ToAvyovot alt yuvaikes eior, ToUTO oupPaiver paA- 

* i.e., yolk only, not white as well; and as there are two 
yolks these parts are formed double. For the distinction 
between “‘nutritive”’ (i.e., formative) and * ‘ growth-promot- 
ing ” nourishment, see 744 b 32 ff. Cf. also 751 b 2 ff, 

» Not huddled up together.” 

422 

on 

GENERATION OF: ANIMALS, IV. wv. 

since the fetations, on account of being situated 
close to each other, grow on to. each other, just 
as many fruits sometimes do. . Of these twin-eggs, 
those in which the yolks are kept apart by the 
membrane develop into two separate chicks, and 
there is nothing extraordinary about them ; those in 
which the yolks are continuous, with nothing to hold 
them apart, give rise to chicks that are monstrosities : 
they have one body and one head, but four legs and 

ings, the reason for which is that the upper parts 
of the body are formed out of the white and before 
the rest, the nourishment being dispensed to them 
from the store in the yolk, whereas the lower part 
(a) is formed afterwards, (6) its nourishment is uni- 
form and homogeneous.* 

A snake, too, has been seen with two heads, and 
the cause is the same—this also is a class of animal 
which lays eggs and is prolific. Monstrosities occur 
less frequently, however, with snakes owing to the 
shape of their uterus, in which, on account of ‘its 
length, the numerous eggs lie one after another in a 
row.’ Nothing of this kind occurs with bees and 
wasps, because their offspring are laid in separate 
cells. With the common fowl, however, the opposite 
is the case—a fact which clearly goes to show that 
we are bound to hold that the cause of such things 
is in the material,° since with other animals too 
they occur more frequently in those that are prolific. 
Hence they occur less frequently in human beings, for 
the offspring which these produce is as a rule one in 
number, and it is perfected by the time of birth, since 
even in this species the occurrence of monstrosities is 
more common in those regions where the women are 

¢ Not in the semen. 
423 

\ARISTOTLE) FP A144 aD 

770 a ” > A LA > ‘ cal 
Aov, ofov mepl Atyurrov. ev dé Tais aifi Kai Tots 
mpoParors yiveran pGAXov: todvToKwrepa yap éorw. 
ere O€ paMov € ev ols mrohuaxiBeow moAuToKa ‘yap 

770 b 

€oTt Ta Touabra’ tov Cobwy. Kal, ov TeAevoy sve, 
_ Kabarep 7 uD KUwv: Ta yap ToAAG TiKTEL Tupha TOU- 
twv. 80 Hw 8 \airiay Tobto cupPaiver Kab dv ay 
aitiay toAvToKotow, vorepov AeKTéov. aAAG Tpo- 
@domoinrar TH pvoet [mpos}* TO TeparoroKet ty’ Te 
5 a yevva opova dua thy aréAevav: eat Oe Kal 70 
Tepas Tov dvopolay.. Ovdzrep emaMdrret : TooTo TO 
CUUTT WUE Tots: Tovobrous ray. dow. év yap tov- 
. Tow padvora yiverar Kal Ta peTaxYoLpa KaAovpEVa. 
tadra § €oti Kata ti merovOdTa TepaTra@des* 70 
yap éxAeimew 7) mpoceivat TU Tepar des. €or 
10 70 Tépas TOV mapa pug [74], * jrapa. pow s od 
mécav .aAAa Thy ws emt TO TOV: Tepl yap THY 
del Kat THY €€ avayKns odbev yiveras mapa piow, 
GAN ev tots ws emi TO TOAD ev OVTW ywopevots, 
evdexopievors dé Kal das, emel Kal Tovrew ev 
daots oupPaiver Tapa TV Tagiy pe Tabryy, del 
15 pevTow a TUXOVTWS, HtTov elvar doKet Tepas, Sud 
TO Kal TO Tapa dvow clvar tTpdmov TWA. KaTa 
1 sic PSYZ*: gor yap 7a 7. 7. vulg. 2 secl. Btf. 

37 A.-W.: tw Y: 7o vulg. * 70m.’ PL 
1t : 1 

CF. HLA. 584 b 7, 31; the passage in Hippocrates, cm 
dépwv vddrew romwyv 12 (ii. ‘54 Littré) rd re xrqvea tixrew TE 
muxvotata Kal exrpépew xadAdora may refer to Egypt and 

Libya > Ch. 6 below. ° 771 a 18 ff. 
e Vie. which produce imperfect oS 
‘See 149a2. 1 Cf. 772 a 35, etc. 9% See Introd. § 9. 

424 

= aa 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. wv. 

prolific—in Egypt, for instance.*.. Monstrosities occur 
more frequently in goats and sheep, because they 
are more prolific ; and still more frequently in the 

i animals, because animals of this sort are 
prolific and the offspring is not perfected when born 
(e.g., the dog)—most of these creatures’ young, of 
course, are born blind. The cause why this occurs? 
and the cause why they are prolific ° must be stated 
later. But the way to the production of monstrosities 
has been already prepared for Nature by the fact that 
they generate offspring which, owing to its imperfect 
state, is unlike its parents -—for monstrosities come 
under the class of offspring which is unlike its parents. 
And that is why this particular accident extends its 
range to affect animals of that nature,? and, to bear 
this out, it is among these animals especially that 
metachoira® as they are called occur. These meta- 
choira are creatures which have in some respect 
undergone some “monstrous’’ affection, since the 
lack of any part or the presence of an extra part is 
such an affection. A monstrosity. of course, belongs 
to the class of “* things contrary to Nature,” although 
it is contrary not to Nature in her entirety but only 
to Nature in the generality of cases‘ So far as con- 
cerns the Nature which is always? and is by necessity, 
nothing occurs contrary to that; no; unnatural 
occurrences are found only among those things which 
occur as they do in the generality of cases, but which 
may occur otherwise. Why. even in those instances 
of the phenomena we are considering, what occurs 
is contrary to this particular order, certainly, but 
it never happens in a merely random fashion ; and 
therefore it seems less of a monstrosity because 
even that which is contrary to Nature is, in a 

425 

770 b 

ARISTOTLE iit 

piow, drav [en Kparnon THY KaTa THY oAnv 7 
Kara. To eldos ‘pvais. SvdTep ovTe Ta Tolubra 
Tépata Aéyovow, ot’ év Tots dAAous ev doois eiwhé 
TU yiveobat, Kabdarep ev Tots mepucapTiots. © €ore 

20 yap Tis aptreAos HV Kadobat TwWes Kdaveov, nV," dy 
eveyKn preAavas Borpvas,” od Kpivovot Tépas Oud TO 
mevoTaxts etwhevau TaUTAY Tobro Tovey. airvov 
8 ore peerage Acuxijs € €otl THY pvaw Kal cAaivys, 
wot ov Tmoppwbev 7 bet aBaows ovd’ womepavel 
mapa dvow: ob yap eis adAny iow, 

25  °Ev 5d€ tots modutoKos ratra® ovpBaiver Sua! 
TO THY ToAvToKiay: eumodilew® Tas TeAEWMoes 
adAnAwy Kal Tas KUWoELS TAS ‘YyevynTLiKdS. |) | 

Ilepi 5€ tHs toAvToKias Kat Tob 7Acovacpod Tob 
TOv pep@v, kal tis dAvyotokias Kal jroverokias 

30 kal Tis evdelas TOV pepOv, atropyjociev av Tis. 
yiverau yap éviore Ta pev mAelovs ExovTa SaKTv- 
Aovs, Ta 8’ eva jLovov, Kal mepi Ta GAda HEpn TOV 
avrov Tpomov" Kal yap mAcovaler cal Koopa 
yiverat, 7a, b€ Kal duo € exovTa. aidora, TO [Lev dppevos 
TO d€ O7jAeos, Kad ev dvOpurrous Kal pdAora mepl 

35 Tas alyas. yivovTat yap ds KaAdoda. Tpayaivas 
dua TO OyAeos Kal dppevos EXEL aisoiov: 787. S€ 
Kal Képas al€ €yovoa eyéeveTo mpos TH oxeAet. 

4 Sus. * Bérpuas PZ: Bérpus vulg. 
4 mera A,-W. (radra ve Aldus): h ravrd. TE vulg. : : Te OM. ds 

Tépara coni, A.-W, dua Zs: Kai dua 
5 76 suprascr. Z}*: om. vulg. = eurrodiver re 

“ce 

* As it can be represented as a case of one ee 
failing to control another * nature,” it can be termed * 
accordance with nature.” See Introd. § j4. 

> Cf. Theophrastus, Hist. Plant. 11. 3. 2, where it iectated 
that the pdvres do not consider the vagaries of this plant 

426 

——F 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. tv. 

way,in accordance with Nature (i.e., whenever the 
“formal” nature has not gained control, over the 
“ material’ nature).? Hence, people do_ not, call 
things of this sort monstrosities any more than they 
do in the other cases where something occurs habitu- 
ally—as happens with fruit. ‘Thus, there is a certain 
sort of vine—‘‘ smoky ”® is the name some people 
give it ;—and if it bears black grapes they do not 
reckon it as a monstrosity, because it often and 
habitually does this. The reason is that it is inter- 
mediate in its nature between white and black, and 
so the alteration is quite small and not really contrary 
to nature, because it is not an alteration to a different 
nature. .~ 

These things, then, occur in the case of the animals 
which produce, numerous young, because the numer- 
ous offspring which are produced hamper each other's 
being brought to perfection and also the movements 
which effect generation. . 

A puzzle may be raised about this production of Relation of 
numerous offspring and the redundance of parts, and Ma"asna 
the production of few or one offspring and. the ency of 
deficiency of parts: sometimes animals are born pipet SE 
having too many toes, some having one only ; and rg es 
the same with the other parts : Some have too many ; stances 
some are mutilated ; some actually have two organs “4 
of generation, one male and the other female. This 
happens with human beings, and with goats especi- 
ally. Goats are born which are called tragainai ° on 
account of their possessing both male and female 
organs of generation. We have also had an instance 
of a goat being born that had a horn on its leg. Altera- 

to be sufficiently unusual or unnatural to be-of any terato- 
logical significance. 5 © Hermap ites. 

A427 

771 a 

or 

10 

15 

20 

ARISTOTLE)! 61) 14%0 

yivovrat de peraBodat Kal mpedaets Kal arepi Ta 
evros [opra., TO 7 pe) exew evra 7 kexodoBapeva 
eyew kal mAeiw Kal pebeor@ra ‘Tovs TOTovs. 
Kapdiay frev odv odbev mosToTe eyevero C@ov ovK 
exov, onAjva 5S ovK Exov, Kal 8vo éyov, Kat vedpov 
eva." rap 8 ovK EXOV pev ovbev, ody Bove 
€xyov. Tatra dé mavra ev tots TeAcwbetor Kal 
{a@ow. evpioxerar Kal yoAjyv ovK éxovTa, Tepu- 
Kota éxew: Ta dé mAclovs exovTa judas. dn o 
eyeveto Kal peleotyKOTa KaTa TOTOV, TO [LEV AaTaAp 
ev Tots apiotepois, 6 Sé omAnv ev tois Se€tois. 
Kal Taira ev ev ye TeTeheopevors @rrau tots 
Caous, WomTeEp etpyrac- ev 5€ Tots TURTOPEVOLS™ 
éxovra mony Kal mavrobariy Tapaxynv. Ta je 
ovv puKpov trapexBaivovra tiv dvow Civ eiwhev, 
Ta dé A€iov od Civ, étav ev tots Kuptiois Tod 
Cav yevnrar TO Tapa pow. 

‘H dé oKeypus eoTl 7) mepl ToUT@ mOTE pov Thy 
avriy airiav Se vopilew THhS povoroKias | Kal THS €v- 
deias Tav Lsp@v Kal Too mAcovacpod Kal THs TOAU- 
ToKlas 7) [27 THY abray. 

IIpa&rov pev obv dua Tt Ta pev eot. modvTOKa 
Ta O€ povoToKa, TodT av Tis ddgevev edvAdyws 

/ A \ / ~ "4 
Gavpacew. 7a yap péywoTa. povoToKa tov Caw 
eativ, olov eAdpas KapnAos immos Kal Ta povuyxa: 
TouTwy b€ Ta pev peilw Tav ddAwv, Ta Se Todd 

1 sic Bekker: yevvwpévors O marg.* : in filiis &: eipnpevos 
PSYZ. 

* j.¢., have passed beyond the embryonic stage, have 
reached the end of their period of development. 
» For a discussion of this see P. A. Bk. IV, ch. 2, 

428 

———— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1 

tions and deformations occur in respect of the inward 
parts too; animals either lack certain parts, or have 
them in a mutilated form, or have too many of them, 
or in the wrong places: No animal, it is true, has 
ever been born without a heart, but ete have been 
animals without a spleen, and with two spleens, and 
with one kidney ; none without any liver at all, but 
certainly with an incomplete one. These phenomena 
are found in animals that are perfect * and living. 
We find, also, animals with no gall-bladder which 
naturally should have one’; others with more than 
one. Instances have occurred of organs in the 
wrong places: the liver on the left side and the 
spleen on the right. These things, as I said, have 
been observed among animals which have reached 
perfect growth; among newly born animals in- 
stances have been seen exhibiting great and varied 
confusion: Those which depart only slightly from 
the natural usually live; these which depart more 
than that do not—.e., when their unnatural con- 
formation lies in the parts that control the creature’s 
life. 

The point about these which we have to consider 
is the following. Ought we to hold that one and the 
same cause is responsible for the production of a single 
offspring and the deficiency in the parts, and also for 
the production of many offspring and the redundancy 
in the parts, or not ? 

To begin, then, first of all, with the fact that some @) Number 
animals produce many offspring, others a single one ° “Prins: 
only. Surely surprise at this is very reasonable, as it 
is the largest of the animals which produce one only, 
e.g., the elephant, the camel, the horse and those 
with uncloven hoofs ; of these, some are larger than 

429 

771 a 

771 b 

ARISTOTLE T0001) 

Svadeper Kata TO ie be Ktvwv 8€ Kat XbKos 
Kal TO. modvoxidy TavTa ox moAuréKa,! ‘Kal Th 
puKpa TOY ToLovTwv, olov 7d THY pvav yévos.. Ta 
dé duyndAa édiyordKed mAjv dds" pe (be rap 
25 moAuTéKwv €otiv. evAoyov yap Ta [ev peydAa 
tAciw S¥vacban yervdv Kat oméppa dépetv mAciov. 
attvov 8° adtd ro Bavpaldopevov Tob ju) Oavpdlew- 
dud yap To péyeBos od rodvToKobow: 7) yap tpod?) 
Katavahioxerar Tots genie eis THY avténow Tob 
odpatos: tots 8 eddrroow dé Tod peydbous 1 
30 pvois adedobca® mpos TO eEpitrwpua tmpooriPnot 
TO oTEppatiKoV THY DrEepoynv. ert dé TO yervncay 
omépia mAciov pev TO TOD peilovos avayKatoy 
elvar, puxpov dé to Trav edarrévwv. ToAAa pev 
obv® puKpa yévour’ av ev TabT@, peydAa S€ oda 
/ a \ /, / \ ; i : 
xarerov. [rots dé pécos peyeeot TO pecov 
35 amédwkev 1) ptois. Tob pev ody Ta pev elvat 
peydAa TOV Cowy ta 8 edXdtTw Ta dé peoa Tpd- 
aere \ s"c> z e Stiles 
TEpov cipjKapev THY aitiav> povotoKa dé, Ta 8 
ddvyoroKa, Ta 5€ ToAUTOKA TOV Caw éoriv.}* ds 
vs HE aha, Mia SP aN \ r 7 *BS . ox 
pev él TO TOAD Ta pev pwovuxa povoTéKa, Ta de 
duynAd OAvyotéKa, ta S€ TmoAvoyidh ToAvTOKA. 

, oor ¢ e atin \ \ \ u 
tovtov 8 aitiov dt. ws emi TO ToAD Ta peyeln 

1 oa. P: x. 0. vulg. 

* adedodoa PS: ddaipotca vulg. 
3 ody PSY: odv xai vulg. * seclusi: om. &. 

430 

eS CT 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. rv. 

the other animals, some are really outstanding in 
respect of size. The dog, on the other hand, and the 
wolf, and practically all the fissipede animals produce 
many ap ean ; even small animals of this class do 
so, such as the mouse family. The cloven-hoofed 
animals produce few offspring, except the pig, which 
is among those that produce many. As I said, this is 
surprising, because we might have expected the large 
animals to be able to generate more offspring and to 
produce more semen. But the very thing that sur- 
prises us is the reason why we should not be surprised. 
Their size is the very reason why they do not produce 
many offspring, because in animals of this sort the 
nourishment gets used up to supply the growth of the 
body, whereas in the case of the smaller animals, 
Nature takes away from their size and adds the sur- 
plus on to the seminal residue. Further, the genera- 
tive semen of a larger animal must of necessity be 
greater in bulk,* and that of the lesser ones small. 
Also, though many small ones may very well be 
formed in one place, it is difficult for many large 
ones to be. [To the intermediate sizes Nature has 
allotted the intermediate number. As for the fact 
that some animals are large, some smaller, and 
some intermediate, we have stated the cause of 
this earlier.]}® For the most part it is the solid- 
hoofed animals which produce a single offspring, the 
cloyen-hoofed animals which produce few, and the 
fissipede animals which produce many. The reason 
for this is that for the most part the distinction of 

4 But this pro rata merely ; so that a large animal has no 
net advantage over a small one in this respect. 

® The preceding words seem to be irrelevant ; those which 

follow immediately in the Greek cannot be construed, and I 
have omitted them from the translation. 

431 

ARISTOTLE. YictE) 

771 b 5 , \ \ \ , ce, ee 
5 Sudpiorar Kara Tas Siadopas Tavras. ov pany exer 

> ¢ > \ 4, ” A O, 4 +7 
y ovtws emt mdvrwv aitiov yap péyebos Kai 
puKporns TOV owpdrey THs dhuyoroKias kal 7roAv- 
ToKias, add’ od To pdbvuxov i. mohvaxdes 7 u duyndov 
elvat TO vEevos. tovtov d€ wapTupiov: 6 yap ehédas 
péeyiotov tTa&v Caw, €ote 5é modvayides, TE 
/ \ ~ ~ / ” 

10 KdunAos SuynAcov trav AourGv péyvorov ov. od 
povov &’ ev trois melots adAa Kat ev tots mrnvois 
Kat ev Tots mAwTois Ta pev peydra ddvyoroKa 

Spl 
€oTl Ta de puKpa moAuToKa, dia THY adr ay, airtay, 
dpolws d5é Kal tov duta@v od Ta péeyrora Peper 
mAetorov Kapmoy. 

15 Ava ti pev ody Tar Cae Ta pev oro ihebiedt Ta 
s ddvyordKa. Ta be HovordKa" THY pvow corly, 
elpntar Ths de vov pybeions drropias padXov av 
Tis evAdyws* Javpdoeey emi TeV ToAuroKouvrenr, 
emrevo1). faiverat ToAAdKis amo pds dxElas KviCKd- 
peva Ta Toadra tov Cawv. Oo Se omépya Td 
Too dppevos, elite ovpPdAdrerar mpos THY vAnV 

20 popiov ‘ywopevov TOD KuApaTos Kal T@ TOD OyXEos 
oméppatt puyvuevov, elite Kal pq) TOUTOV TOV 

, 2>\)}? e 5) , Ey 
TpoTov, GAN dorep Payev auvdyov. Kat dy- 
puoupyouv Thy vAnv thy ev T@ OyrAee Kal TO 
TEpitTwUA TO oTreppatiKdy, KaNdmEep 6 OTOS TV 
bypotnta Tob ydAaKros, dia tiva tor aitiav ody 

25 €v amoteAet Cov péyelos exov, domep evradla 
¢,. 2_ rg 2\\>2 2? , ‘a ‘ ’ 
6 O705, aoe ev ToUTw T@ TepitTmpart mAclw 
1 +a b€ jiovordka P: om. vulg. 2 edAdoyws P: om. vulg. 

8 domep .. . O70s “yee secludenda. 

432 

GENERATION OF ‘ANIMALS, IV. vw. 

sizes corresponds to these differences. At the same 
time, this does not hold good of all of them, because 
the reason for their producing few or many offspring 
is the size, great or small, of their bodies, not the 
fact that that particular kind of animal is cloven- or 
solid-hoofed or is fissipede. Here is a proof of this. 
The elephant is the biggest of the animals, but it 
is fissipede ; the camel, which is the next. biggest, is 
cloven-hoofed. And it is not only among the animals 
that walk but also among those that fly. and swim 
that the big ones produce few offspring and the 
small ones produce many; and the cause is the 
same. Similarly, too, it is not the biggest plants 
that.bear the most fruit. 

We have stated why the nature of some animals is 
to produce many offspring, that of others to produce 
few, that of others to produce one only. So far as the 
puzzle which has now been mentioned is concerned, 
one might rather be justifiably surprised in the case 
of those animals which produce many offspring, in 
view of the fact that animals of this sort, as we see, 
often conceive as the result of one act of copulation. 
Now it may be that the semen of the male contributes 
to the material (in the female) by becoming part of 
the fetation and by mixing with the semen of the 
female ; or it may be that it does not act in this way, 
but, as we hold, acts by concentrating and fashioning ¢ 
the material in the female, z.e., the seminal residue, 
just as fig-juice ® acts upon the fluid portion of the 
milk ; but whichever of these views is right, what on 
earth is the cause why the semen does not turn out 
one single animal of a fair size, just as the fig-juice 
acts in our example, (but that instead several off- 

® Cf. 767 b 17, 772 b 32. > See 737 a 15. 
433 

! IARISTOPLE ITALIA: 

771 b 
pst » ‘fos KeXepiorat T@ ovvieravai® moody 

° aAv’ Sowrep av els metov EAOn Kai Tetov, 
TOGOUTW TO TI yVEpevov €OTL peiloy |’ 70 perv odv 
eAKew odvas Tovs TOTOUS THS. dorépas 70 oméppia, 
Kat dia TobTO TAciw yiveoBas, dua TO THY TOmwWY 
Af 90s Kal Tas korvndovas® ovx év ovoas,” odbev 

30 €orw* ev TadT@ yap yivovrat ‘TOT THs borépas 
dvo mroAAdkis, ev S€ Tots molurdKois, 6 orav mAnpwO) 
TOV eHBpdor, edeéijs Keiieva. daiverar. todro 8¢ 
d7jAov ex TH, avarou@v €otw. aAd worep Kai 
Tercovpevwy tav Cdbwv €orw éxdotov Tt péyeBos 
, ee A a \ : eat Ar, T 8 MD 
Kal émt TO peilov Kal emt 7d EAarTov, dv ovr’ av 
35 petlov yévorto ovr Eharrov, aGAW ev 7H perakd 
diaorHwate TOD peyeBouvs AapPdavover mpos aAAnda 
ee \ yo wy ore , 
772a tiv drepoxyny Kal THY eAAcupw, Kal yiverar peilwy 
€ 9g? 27 * " a »” / 

6 8 éddrrwy avOpwros Kai Tav GAAwy Cadwyv 
étioby, ovTw Kali €& js yiverau HAns omeppatiKis, 
odK €oTW aopioros: ovr é€mi TO mA€iov ovr emt 7d 
éharrov, wor e€ dmoona0bv yiveobat T@ TAGE. 

5 doa obv TOV Cou bud THY elpnpevny aittay mA¢iov 
mpoleTrar Tepittwpa 7 els evos Cov apynv, odK 

1 talia desideraverat Platt, ego supplevi (sed generantur 
in illa materia et superfluitate multi filii X). 

2 +@ (sic) ovveoravas PZ, om. Y. 3 zvom. SZ. 

4 procul dubio secludenda (cf. 772 a 22): om. &. 

5 Aéyovow addunt YS. 

® ovxevovoas Z. credo etiam da 70 +.» Ovoas secludenda. 

* The words supplied are necessary to complete the argu- 
ment, as Platt points,out; and they are in fact preserved in 
Scot’s version (see app. crit.). They were no doubt ousted — 
from the Greek text by the additional remarks about fig- 

434 

3 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. trv. 

are formed out of that residue)?* [It is 
not divided up owing to its causing a certain quantity 
of milk to set, but the more the amount of milk 
into which it is put and the more fig-juice there 
is, so much the greater is the amount that gets 
eurdled.]' It is sometimes said that the regions of 
the uterus draw the semen, and on that account 
several offspring are formed, because these regions 
are several in number and because the cotyledons? 
are not a unity. This theory, however, has nothing 
in it, because often two embryos are formed in the 
same region of the uterus, and in the case of animals 
which produce many offspring, when the uterus is 
full of erat they can be seen lying in a row. 
This is clear from dissections. -No; what happens is 
this. When animals are being perfected, there is a 
certain size for each, a limit of bigger and smaller ; 
none will be formed either bigger or smaller than 
these sizes, but the excess or deficiency of size which 
they acquire as compared with one another lie within 
this interval between the two limits, and thus it is 
that one human being (or any other animal) is formed 
bigger and another smaller. In precisely the same 
way, the seminal material out of which (the embryo) 
is formed is not unlimited in either direction—the 
amount of it can be neither bigger nor smaller than 
certain limits ; the embryo cannot be formed out of 
any casual amount of it. Thus, in the case of those 
animals which (on account of the cause stated) dis- 
charge more residue than is requisite for the principle 

juice, which appear to have formed part of a marginal note 
(cf. below 772 a 22 ff., with which passage they are obviously 
connected). 

> For the cotyledons, see above, Bk. I. 745 b end. 

435 

T72a 

- ARISTOTLE Ago 

evdexerar ex tatryns ev yiveoBar mans, adda 
Tooatra doa Tots peyeDeow Bpiorat ois ixvou- 
pevors. ovd€ TO TOD appevos o7épyia 7 UI dvvapus 
H ev TO omeppare ovbev ovornger! mA€ov 7) €Aarrov 
10 Tod mepukéros. Opoiws 7° ef mA€ov oméppa apinaw 
TO dppev 7) Suvdpeis mAciovs ev Siarpoupevw TO 
, 7M / val \ a bet ic’ 
oméppatt, odfev troujoer petlov 7d mAeiorov, GAda 
Kal TobvayTioV dcapbepet karagnpaivoy. ovde yap 
TO Tip Deppaiver TO pap paMov, Sowmep av 7 
mAéov, GAN’ €oTw dopos Tus" Tis Deppornros, hs bn- 
15 apxovons eav avén tis TO mop, Oeppov yey odKeTL 
yiverat paMov, efarpiver dé paMov, Kal téAos 
adavilerat Kal yiverar Enpdv. érel dé daiverau 

/ a , \. »* , ray 
ovpetplas Setobai twos mpds GAAnAa 76 TE TeEpiT- 

A lon / \ \ A ~ a ” 
Twpa 70 70d OxjAcos Kal To mapd Tob dppevos, 
doa mpolerat omépa TOV appéevwv, Ta ToAUTOKA 

~ 4 b) \ > # - ‘ \ + ; / 

20 Trav Cwwv edlds adinor 7d ev adppev Suvapevov 
tAciw cuviotavat wepildpevov, Td dé OAV Tooodrov 
Ad / / /, A > ‘ _- 
wore tAciovs yiveobat ovotdcets. (TO 8’ emt Tob 
4 , \ > a , oo e 
ydAakros tapddevypa AexBev ody Gpordy eoTi* 7 
bev yap Tod omépyatos Bepudotrns od povov cuv- 
/ 4 > \ \ ae ¢ > > ~ > ~ 
iornot moaov adda Kat movdv® tL, 7 8 ev TH OT@ 
25 Kal TH mueTia TO ToGOV pdvov.) TO pev ody ToAAa 

1 ovotnoe PY : ouvicrna vulg. 
2 75 P: om. vulg. 3 ouov aGAda Kal moaov P. 

* See Bk. I, ch. 21 and Introd. §§ 26 ff. 

> Cf. 729 a 18. ¢ Cf. 723 a 30, 767 a 16. 

@ See 737 a 15; 771 b 24. 

¢ I suspect that this parenthesis may have come from a 
marginal annotation ; ¢f. 771 b 24 above. 

436 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. ww. 

of a single animal, it is not possible that the entirety 
of this should be used to form one embryo; on the 
wontrary, as many are formed as is determined by 
the sizes Propet to those animals. Nor again will the 
semen of the male or the dynamis® residing in the 
semen put into shape anything that is greater or less 
than the natural size. Similarly, if the male emits 
more semen, or more dynameis in the semen (in cases 
where the semen gets divided up), the greatest 
possible amount will not make anything bigger (than 
the natural size), but on the contrary will dry the 
material up ® and destroy it. The parallel case of 
fire and water shows this. An increase in the amount 
of fire does not mean that the fire increases the heat 
of the water in the same ratio ; on the contrary, there 
is a limit to the heat, and when that has been reached, 
you may increase the amount of fire, but the water 
does not continue to get hotter; instead it evapor- 
ates more, and finally disappears and dries up. Now 
since, as it seems, there must be some proportional 
relationship ° between the residue of the female and 
that which comes from the male (this applies where = 
the males emit semen), in the case of those animals 
which produce many offspring the male at the outset 
emits semen which is able, when divided up into 
portions, to give shape to a number of fetations, while 
the female contributes enough material so that a 
number of fetations can take shape out of it. (The 
parallel instance of milk, which was cited,? is not com- 
parable, since, in the case of that which the semen’s 
heat causes to take shape; not only quantity is in- 
volved but also quality, whereas in the case of the 
heat in the fig-juice and the rennet, quantity alone is 
involved.)* This, then, is the reason why in those 

437 

772 a 

172 b 

59 

35 

5 

ARISTOTLE 5) 

yivecOat Ta KUnpiaTa Kal 1) ouvexes év ek mav- 
Tov év Tots Trodurdxous Toor! airvov, Ste obK ee 
dmrogovoby yiverac KnLa., ‘GAN éedv Te ddiyov Fp 

ov €OTal, edy TE TOAD Aiav: copiorac yap Silene 
Kal Tob mdaXovTos Kat THs. Depusrytos. THS. Trowov- 
ons. opotes Oe kat ev Tots HovoroKots K Kal jLe- 
yaAous TeV Epa od moMa ylyvetat €K _TrOMob 
TEPLTTU[LATOS” Kal yap ev exetvous eK 70008. Twos 
moodv TL TO épyalopevov eoTw. od mpoterat pev 
oby m«ten Tovadrny vAnv bua THY Tpoeipnyevny 
airiay: yy dé mpoterat, Tooavrn Kara gpvow €or 
e€ is Ev yiverat dnp povov. €ayv dé mote mAciov 
erOn; dvroKel TOTE. 516 kal doKet Teparwdn Td 
Towabr” elvat paMov, OTe yiverat Tapa TO ws em 
TO TOAD Kal TO clos. 6 de dvOpwmos érrapipore- 
pile. maou Tots yeveow" Kal yap pLovoToKel Kal 
TohvroKet TOTE Kal dduyoroKel, padvora 5€ jLovo- 
TOKOV THY prow earl, did peev THY bypornra Tob 
owp.aTos Kal Deppornra moAuToKor, | TOO yap omep-. 
[aTos 7) pvars v by pa. Kal Bepun, | Sia De re péyeBos 
oduyoToKov Kat }LovoroKov. d1a 5€ TodTo Kal Tovds 
THS KUnTEWS Xpovous pove Tay Cawv dvapiddous 
civat ovpBepnxer. rois pev yap aAdous els €or 
6 xpoves, Tots oe dvOpesrots, metous: Kab) yap 
enTanva Kal Sexdunva “yerv@vrau xal Kara Tovs 

10 peTra&d xpovous: kat yap 7a oxTdpnva. CH per, 

hrrov S€. TO 8 airiwov ek Tdv viv A|exbevTwr 

1 zot7’ P: rodr’ adro yulg. 
2 wore hic P, post oAvyoroxeé vulg. 
3 rod. . . Oepyy secl. Platt. 

@ Of. 776 a 22. 
438 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. tv. 

animals which produce many offspring the fetations 
are many in number and a single continuous one does 
not result instead of many—viz., a fetation is not 
formed out of any casual quantity: if there is too 
little or too much, none will be formed, because there 
is a definite limit set both to the dynamis of the 
material which is acted upon and to that of the heat 
which acts upon it. Similarly also in the case of those 
animals which are large and produce one offspring 
only, a large amount of residue does not give rise to 
a large number of offspring, for the same holds good : 
here ‘too, the amount of the material and of that 
which works upon it are definite. So then they do 
not emit a larger amount of such material, owing to 
the cause already mentioned ; and the material which 
they do emit is, in the natural course, just sufficient 
in amount to proyide for a single fetation only. If 
ever more of it is supplied, then twins are produced. 
And hence, also, such creatures seem rather to be 
monstrosities, because their formation is contrary to 
the general rule and to what is usual. Man, how- 
ever, has a footing in all the classes, producing one 
offspring, or on occasion, many, or few, though most 
naturally and normally one is the ‘number: the 
production of many offspring is due to fluidity of the 
body and to heat, [since the nature of semen is fluid 
and hot ;] of few or of one, to the size of the body. 
And to this it is due also that in man alone among 
the animals is the period of gestation of variable 
length*: other animals have a single period, but 
with man there are several: children are born at 
seven months and ten months and at intermediate 
times, and indeed eight months’ babies live, though 
less often than the others. The reason may be 

439 

ARISTOTLE !1 PA 11450 

a ovvidot zis av, €ipyrat be mepl eters ev -rois 
mpoBArjpaoww. a 
Kai wept pev rodtwv Swpicbw TOV TporTrov 
TOOTOV. 

Tév oe mAcovalovTa popiwv mapa dvow 70 
avTo atrvov Kal THs Sudupotokias. 79 yep. €v 
15 Tots KUNAL ovpBatver ro airvov, eay TAetwy a) 
ovoTh 7 kara Te Too Hoplov vow Tore yap 
ovpPaiver., pev }optov peilov Tav adAwy € EXEW, otov 
Saxrvdov 9 7) xeipa. 7) 700a 7% TL TOV dMwy akpw- 
Thpiwv 7) perv, 7 oxvabevros. Too KUT} MATOS Tete 
yiveodar, Kabdrep €v Tots morapois at Stvae* Kat 
20 yap ev ToUToLS 70 pepopevov bypov kat Kijow 
€xov av Cri)” dyriKpovon ; dvo €& €vos ‘ylvovrat 

ovordoets, exovoat Ty avray Kivnow: Tov ad 
d€ Tpdzrov Kal emt TOV Kunpdrey ovpPaiver. mpoo- 
pverau be pdAvora pev mAngtov dj Awy, eviore 
de Kal moppw Sia TV yeyvopevny ev TO Kunpart 
Kivnow, pddvora d€ dua TO THY Tijs ons brrepoxTy : 
25 dbev adnpéOn exet amodidovar, To 8° eldos Exew 

olev émAcdvacer. 

7 A / ~ @ , ae 
Oca dé ovpBaiver trowatra. wore Svo €xew 
aidota, [ro pev appevos TO 5é Oyreos,|* ai wev TOV 
mAcovalovrwy yiverar TO ev KUptov Td 8° aKupov 
1 qAciwy vAn ovor# coni. Platt, cui consentit & sustentatur 

multa materia : mew BAnv ovotyen vulg. 
2 dv tur Peck: ay vulg. 3 seclusit Platt. 

* This cannot be traced. 

> Of. Bk. I, chh. 21, 22; 767 b 18, ete. 

° ¢.9., the excessive ’ material is drawn from X ;_ it petition 
at Y, and therefore begins to take the form of Y during the 
process of development ; but as there are enough Y already, 

440 

- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. 1. 

perceived from what has just been said; a discus- 
sion ofthese matters is also to. be found in the 
Problems.* - : ) 

This, then, may be taken as the way in which we 
_ With regard. to the redundance of parts which () Reason 
occurs contrary to Nature, the cause of this is the “+ 
same as that of the production of twins, since the 
cause occurs right back in the fetations, whenever 
more material gets ‘‘set”’ than the nature of the part 
requires : the result then is that the embryo has 
some part larger than the others, e.g., a finger or a 
hand or a foot, or some other extremity or limb; 
or, if the fetation has been split up, several come 
to be formed—just as eddies are formed in rivers ; 
here too, if the fluid which is being carried along and 
is in movement meets with any resistance, two self- 
contained eddies are formed out of the original one, 
both of which have the same movement.’ What 
happens in the case of the fetations is on the same 
lines. The normal part and the redundant one are 
usually attached quite close to one another, although 
sometimes they are farther away because of the 
movement which arises in the fetation, and above 
all because (a) the excess of material recurs again 
at the place from which it was originally drawn off, 
and (6) the form which it has is derived from the 
part where it developed as a redundancy.° 

Some creatures develop in such a way that they 
have two generative organs [one male, the other 
female]... Always, when this redundancy happens, 
one of the two is operative and the other inoperative; 

it goes back to where it came from, viz., X; thus a Y is 
- formed at X. 

441 

772 b 

773 a 

30 

ARISTOTLE)! )AH4448) 

T@ Kara, THY Tpopiy dé dpravpodobar dre mapa 
giow 6 ov, tmpoorepuke 5° worrep TO. popara Kal 
yop. Taira AapBaver Tpopiy, Kaitep ovTa bore 
yer Kal Tapa pvow. _ yiverou dé Kparfoavros es 
TOD Snpwoupyobyros Spore, dvo Kal Kpa i 
odes av, de Th pev KpaTnon a) de Kparndi 

plev OAjdv 70 de dippev" oddev yap Siadeper TobTo 
Aéyew emt TOV bopiov 7 emt 700 oAov, be Ty 

35 aitiav yiverar, TO ev OAAv TO 8 dppev. 000, | 

or 

eMetrrovra. yiverat TOV ToLwovTwv Hopiwv, “2 v 
aKpwrnpiov Twos 7) TOV doy, peddr, THY aairny 
det vopilew aitiay jvmep Kal eay dAov' 70. yuope- 
vov duPrwOh, apPrdces d€ yivovrar moAAat Tav 
KUNLaTwV. 

[Avagepovor 3 at pev Tapapvces THIS rohwroxtas 
Tov elpynuevov Tpdtrov, Ta Sé TépaTa TovTwWY Ta 
moAAd elvan avdrav* ovppvow. | <yivovrar be 
Kal peraBodat,  € éviots HEV en eAarrovew Kal 
dryorEepwv Hoptwv,) eviois* dé Kal TobTov TOV 
TpoTov, eav emt peiloveny yevovras Kal Kuplw- 
Tépwv jopiwy, ofov eva exer dvo0 amAjvas Kat 

1 jvrep Kai dy ddov P, A.-W., Platt: Spotov yap, Kav dAws 
2 +@ ta ToAAa abrav elvar 
s Svaheppvar + +. ovpdvoww secl., nam argumento haud 
consona.  cetera.ex & versione suppleyi: ¢ Sorte erit alteratio 
(=peraBody, cf. T71 a 1) in membris parvis vilibus et in 
magn is prince alibus 2. 
4 vious Peck: ea vulg. 

, 

® Cf.767b17. The semen of the male, the “ movement ” 
of the male. » Of. 168 b 3.5 

¢ The words marked for excision are probably an annota- 
tion which has ousted the text (here tentatively restored from 

Scot’s Latin version); and it may be remarked that the- 

4.42 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. w. 

since the latter, being contrary to Nature, always 
gets stunted so far as nourishment is concerned ; 
owever, it is attached, just as growths (or tumours) 

r¢ 

are: these, like it, secure nourishment, although the 
date of their origin is later than that of the creature 
itself and they are contrary to Nature. The result 
of the fashioning agent * having gained the mastery, 
or having been completely mastered, is that two 
similar generative organs are formed ; if it to some 
extent gains the mastery and to some extent gets 
mastered, one is formed female and the other male,— 
for it comes to the same thing whether we apply this 
explanation of why one is formed female and another 
male to the case of the parts or to the animal as a 
whole.’? And wherever a deficiency occurs in such 
parts as e.g. an extremity or some other limb, we 
must take it that the cause is the same as it is if 
the whole of the forming creature suffers abortion— 
and abortions of fetations frequently occur. 

© {Redundant growths differ from the production of 
numerous offspring at a birth in the way which has 
been stated; monstrosities differ from redundant 
growths in that most monstrosities are instances 
of embryos growing together.] (Alterations, too, 
occur ; in some cases they affect the smaller and 
less important parts,) whereas others are affected in a 
different way,t.e., if the alteration occurs in the larger 
parts, which haye more to do with the control of the 

organism—e.g., some have two spleens, or several 

meaning borne by répara is at variance from that which it 
bears elsewhere in the discussion. The words may be an 
annotation intended for 773 a 13. The lines following (down 
to peftorapévns) seem to be a similar kind of summary, 
though more correct, and they too may be out of place or 
redundant. 

443 

773 a 

ARISTOTLE )!'PAsA“ND 

mAciovs veppovs. ert dé petaordces TOV jLopiwv 
f 1 a / 7 > Arr ~ A 
TIO BOrr PEWOLENED "TOP Rev aOerae Slap. ware THs vAns 
peOiorapevs. év 8° elvar to C@ov To Tepar des 
7) mAciw oupmepunora Set vomilew Kara THY apy, 

10 olov. ef Towodrdv eoTw 1) Kapdia [optov, TO fev 

pulav €xov Kapdiav ev CHov, ta dé mAcovalovta 
popia mapadices, Ta dé mAciw exovra. dvo prev 
elvar, ovpmedukevar dé dia tiv Tav Konpdrov 
ovvaryuw. 

LupPaiver S¢ modAdnis Kal. trav od Soxovyrww 
dvamrnpeov elvat Coswv mroAXois 75m TereAcvopevors 

15 rovs pev ouparepureva Tov Topwv todvs d€ Tap- 

exrerpapbas. Kal yap O7Aeci Tiow Sn TO ordpa 
TOV borepav oupuTepuKos duereAevev, 789 8 dpas 
ovons TOV Karapnviay Kal mOvwv emuyuyvopeveny® 
tais pev adrouatov eppayn, tats 0° dbo latpav 
SunpeOn: tas dé diapbapiva ovverecev 7 Praias* 

20 yevomevns THs prgews 7 yeveobar pr) Svvapevys. 

kal Tdv Taidwy éeviots od} KaTa TO avTO ouVéemeEcE 
~ / \ , ‘ 
TO Tépas TOO aidoiov Kal 6 mdpos H SiepyeTat TO 
\ > a / > > / 
TEpiTTWUA TO EK Ths KUoTEwWs, GAN’ broKdtwhev: 
/ ~ ~ \ » > 
duo Kal Kabypevor otpotor, Tav S5é Opyewv ave- 
/ ” a a ” 7 / 
omacpevwv avw doKxodar Tots damobev org OnAcos 

25 €xew aidotov Kal dppevos. 70m dé Kal 6 THs Enpas 

Tpopys* Topos auptrepuKas € emi TLWV Cabwv YEVENS 
: Tapert pemopeveav Ps 
2 énvyryvonevwy Ps yeyvouevwy vulg. 
3 Biaias P: Big. vulg. 
4 fort. <wepitr@paros> supplendum: exitum superfluitatis 
siece dX. : 

444: 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. wv. 

kidneys. Also, there are instances of the parts 
changing their position, due to diversion of the 
“ movements ”’ and change of position of the material. 
Whether an animal which is a monstrosity is to be 
reckoned as one or as several grown together depends 
upon its “ principle ” ; thus, assuming that the heart 
is a part answering to this description,* a creature 
which ‘possesses one heart will be one animal, and 
any supernumerary parts will be merely redundant 
growths ; those, however, which have more than one 
heart we shall reckon as being two, which have grown 
together owing to the conjoining of the fetations. 

It often happens, even with many animals that do (@ Other 
not appear to be deformed and have actually reached formations. 
complete development, that some of their passages 
have grown together, and that others have been 
diverted. We know of instances of women in whom 
the os uteri was grown together and continued so 
until the time arrived for the menstrual discharge to 
begin and pain came on ; in some, the passage burst 
open of its own accord, in others, it was separated by 
physicians ; and in some cases, where the opening 
either was forcibly made or could not be made at 
all, the patients succumbed. There have been in- 
stances of boys in whom the termination of the 
penis has not, coincided with the passage through 
which the residue from the bladder passes out, so 
that the passage came too low; and on this account 
they sit in order to pass water, and when the 
testes are drawn up they seem from a distance to 
have. both male and female generative organs. 
There have also been instances in certain animals, 
sheep and others too, where the passage (for the 

* Viz., the ** principle.” 

445 

ARISTOTLE ; AH twiwig? 

773 a 
Kal TpoPdtwv Kat aNewv, € érei Kai Bods ev [lepivbw 

eyeveto F Sia Tis KVoTEWS Aenrn Sin foupern tpodi 
Sieywper, Kal dvarpnbévros Tod apxod taxd addy 
avvepvero , Kal oUK émeKpaTouV Suaipodvres. Pe 

30 Tlept bev odv odvyoToKias Kal ToAvtoias | Kal 

mepi ‘pdoews Tav mAcovalovTwy 7 eMdeurdvreov* 

popiwy, ére dé mrepl TOV Teparwday, elpyrat. viet vi 

V Tév 8 Cwv Ta pev 6AwWS OdK emiKvioKETaL TA 

oe emuKviokerat, Kal TOV emruKvioKopevenv Ta [Lev 

35 SUvarau Ta Kunpara extpepew, Ta dé more pev 

mote & ov. Tob dé en emucvioxesbae ¢ aiizvoy ort 

773 b povoToKa €oTiv. Td TE yap peovoxa ‘obK. em: 
KviokeTar Kal Ta TovTwv peilova: dia yap. TO 
péyebos TO mepirrwpa dvaAioKerat eis TO Konya. 
méou yap dmapxer péyebos ToUTOLS GwWpaTos, TOV 
de peyddoy Kat Ta eEuBpva peydAa Kata Adyov 
€or: b10 Kal to Ta&v eAcddvtwy euBpvov HAiKov 
HOaxos eoTly. Ta d€ moduToKa emikviokerar Bia 
TO Kal TOY TAcLovwr® 708 évos. eivau Barépy Ad-repov 
emikdnua. Tovtwy d doa pev péyebos exer, Kab- 
; darep dvOpwros, €av pev 7) érépa dxela THs érTépas 
10 yevnyra mapeyyes, eKTpepet TO emucunbev" 787 yap 

@rrat TO Tovwdrov _ cup BeBnKes. aittov 8€ 76 

nc datas Kal yap ev TH pd ovvovata meiov” 70 

or 

1 repi dvcews scripsi: dispositionem X: mapa ¥ tabi Btf.: 
TEpt Tapapvoews P: mapadicews vulg. 
24 eMeumovreny om. 
3 Kal TOv mAevovwr P, ALWit ra metova vulg. ; ; sed propter 
parvitatem corporis filii & pro dia . . . em«dnpa. 

* Superfetation is a very abnormal occurrence. It happens 
when a later ovum is fertilized as a result of coitus during 

446 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. tv.-v. 

residue) of the solid nourishment was grown to- 
gether ; in fact, in Perinthus a cow was born which 
used to pass finely-sifted nourishment through the 
bladder. They cut its anus open, but it quickly grew 
together again, and they did not succeed in keeping 
it apart. 

We have now discussed the production of few off- 
spring and many, the nature of supernumerary or 
deficient parts, and also monstrosities. 

In some animals superfetation * does not occur at V 

all, in others it does ; and among the latter some are 
able to complete the nourishing of the fetations, others 
can sometimes do it and sometimes not. The reason 
why in some animals superfetation does not occur is 
that they produce one offspring only. Thus, it does 
not occur in solid-hoofed animals and in larger animals 
than these, because on account of their size the 
residue goes to the fetation and gets used up. _ All of 
these have large bodies, and large animals have large 
embryos, proportionate to their size ; that is why the 
embryo of an elephant is as big as a calf. Superfeta- 
tion, however, does occur in animals which produce 
numerous offspring at a birth, because where there 
are more than a single offspring one is really a super- 
fetation upon another. Of these animals, those that 
are large, such as man, complete the nourishing of the 
second fetation, if the second copulation has taken 
place not long after the first; such an occurrence 
has in fact been observed. The reason is as already 
stated : Even in a single act of intercourse the semen 

pregnancy. The young resulting from the second coitus are 
usually born at the same time as those resulting from the 
first coitus, but are: smaller. See F. H. A. Marshall, Physi- 
ology of Reproduction® (1922), 154. 

447 

Super- 
fetation. 

ARISTOTLE: Oi TANYA 

amiov €or. omépya, 6 pepioev tovet oAvToKelv, 
dv vorepile: Oatepov.' drav 8 709 rod Kuiporos 
ménpevou oupph yiveotat THY dxelay, ETUKULOKETOL 
15 ev mote, oAvydkis pévtor bua TO THY voTEpay 
ouppwew ws Ta TOAAG pexpe TOV Kuau/lenanherte 
yovakiv. av dé ovpBhh moré (Kal yap Tod7’ Pm 
yéeyovev), od Stvarau TeAevodv, aAAa Kuqpar ék- 
Tepe TapatAnova Tots KaAoupevois eKTPwWLAOW. 

7 ‘ > ‘& ~ / \ ‘ / na 
woTrep yap emt Tv povoToKwv dua TO peyebos eis 

20 76 Tpotimdpyov TO TEpitTwLA TpéTEeTAL TGV, OTW 

x / \ > / \ > , Zire > 
Kat TovTois, ANY ékelvois pev EevOUsS, TovToIs 8 

~ , 
otav avéybA to EuBpvov: tore yap €xovor mapa- 
aA Ul 
TAnoiws Tots povoToKois. dpoiws dé dia TO TOV 
avOpwrov dtoct todutéKov elvar, Kat mepieivail Tt 
TH peyeler ris dorépas Kal TOO MEpUrrth ars, al 
25 LevTOL TODOUTOV WaTE ETEPOV eKTpEpEL”, pepo, TOV 
Cobwv oyelav éemidéyovras KvobvTa yuri) Kal timmos, 
¢ \ A \ > 4 a s of 8 7 8 / 
 pev Oia TIV etpnuevnv airiav, 4 8 tmmos Bud 
coal / ‘ my yt 
Te Thy THs Pdcews oTEppdTnTa® Kal TO mepLEtval 
Ti THS baTépas pweyeOos, tA€ov prev 7) TH Evi, EAaT- 
, a of ” > h , me, 

tov d€ 7 wote dAdo emKvioxeafar Tédevov. ore 
30 dé dvoet dppob.ovacuKoy dua. TO TabTo tetovbévat 
Tois atTeppots: ekeivd Te yap rowabr eoti dud TO 

4 

1 gv... Oarepov haud sanum videtur. 

2 éxnéurmer P: exminre vulg. 
= j PSY 
oTEpedTyTa ‘ 

@ Viz., those which produce more than one offspring. 
» See 748 a 15 ff. 

448 

eS ee 

ee 

GENERATION OF: ANIMALS, IV“V. 

discharged is more than sufficient, and this when 
divided up into portions causes the production of 
numerous offspring, one of which is later than another. 
When, however, the fetation is already advanced in 
its growth before the copulation takes place, super- 
fetation sometimes occurs, but infrequently, because 
in ‘women the uterus generally closes up during the 
time of pregnancy. But if ever it does happen (as in 
fact it has been. Jenawel to. do), the mother) cannot 
bring second one. to completion, but ejects feta- 
tions that are very similar to what are known as 
abortions. The situation is comparable with that in 
the one-offspring animals, in which, on account of 
their size, all the residue is directed to the already 

existing embryo. So too it happens in these animals,* 

except that in the former it happens straight away, 
whereas*in these it happens when the embryo is 
already advanced in growth, because then their con- 
dition is similar to that of the one-offspring animals, 
Similarly, because man is by nature an animal which 
produces numerous offspring, and because there is 
something over and to.spare as regards the size both 
of the uterus and of the residue (though not enough 
to bring the nourishing of a second embryo to com- 
pletion), women and mares are the only animals which 
admit copulation while they are with young. / In 

. Women it is due.to the reason already stated; in 

mares it is due to the barrenness of their nature,? 
and because the size of their uterus has something 
over and to spare—there is more than enough room 
for one, but not sufficient for a second fetation to be 
brought to completion. Also, mares are by nature 
prone to sexual intercourse because they are in the 
same predicament.as females which. are. barren— 

Q 449 

773 b 

7744 

ARISTOTLE § 3). 14 

p23) yivecBaw Kd0apow (robito 8 €or’ @omep_a Tots 
appear TO _appodiardoa) kal immo at Frprevat 
qcvora mpotevrat KdBapow. ev maou d€ Tots Swo- 
ToKODL TA OTEPpA TOV OnAéwy ddpodiaagrixd 
dia. 70 mapamAnotas, exewv Tots dppeaw, OTav 

35 ovveeypevov bev.) TO omrépya, on dtoxpwdpevov 

d€.. Tots yap DijAcow 7 Tov Karapnvio: KdBbapars 
omépparos €€0d0s éeotw: oT. yap Ta KaTapHvia 
o7réppia amenTov, aomep elpyrau mporepov. hte) 

Kal TOV yovark dv doa Tpds THY Opircay ‘axpareis 

THY rovavrny, OTay TrodvroKnawar, mavovrai This 

5 TTONTEWS’ JexkeKpypevn yap 7) OTEppLaTiKy repit- 

TwOLS, ovKETL. TLOLEL Tis opArias Tavrys jemPopiay. 
év d€ Tols dpyicw. at OrjAcvaw TaY dppévery AtTOv 
elow ddpodioiactixal dua TO pds TH brrolw@pare 
Tas borépas Exel, Ta 8 dppeva Tobvaytiov av 
coro pevovs yap éyet Tovs Opyeis evTds, WoT” av 

104 7c yevos. T@v ToLovTwv [opvideov |? dvoet o7rep- 

pariKoy, ael detoBat THS OptAtas TavTNS. Tots pev 
ovv Oyreoe 70 KaTw KaraBatvew Tas dorépas, Tots 
5 appeot TO dvacmacba Tovs Opxets Puneet 
7po0 6800 mpos Thy oxelav. 

Av. a pev ovv aitiay Ta peey ovK emuxvloKerau 

15 mavTeAds, Ta 8? emixvioxerat pévy 7a S€ Kuypara 

> 4 ¢ \ \ e«.\ ie a \ 8 A 49> 3. f 
EKTPEPEL OTE [Lev OTE Ov, KaL OLA TLV aiTiaY 
Ta pev dppodioiaoriKd Ta 8 ovK appodioracriicd 
T@V TOLOUTWY eoTiV, ElpynTat. 

1 7 Platt: vo vulg. 

2 seclusi ; opvideoy tovrwy P, fortasse scribendum ore bid 

TO Tobro 70 yevos elvar dice. orepparikdv KTA. (et indigent 
miulto coitu propter multitudinem spermatis naturaliter X.) 

450 

a 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. v 

since this also is a condition due to there being 
no evacuation (which corresponds to the emission of 
semen in the. male), and mares discharge extremely 
little evacuation. Further, in all the Vivipara. those 
females which are barren. are_prone to sexual in- 
tm whe they are in a similar condition 

when their, semen is ready, collected 
together,? but is not being emitted, the evacuation 
of the menstrual fluid in females being the emission 
of semen, since, as has been stated earlier, the 
menstrual fluid is “semen that “is  unconcocted. © 
Hence, tod, those ‘women who are incontinent 
in “the matter of*'sexual intércourse, cease from 
their passionate excitement when they have’ borne 
several children, because once the seminal residue 
has been expelled from the body it no longer pro- 
duces the desire for this intercourse. Among birds 
the females are less sexually excitable than the males 
because their uterus is close up. by. the diaphragm, 
whereas the males, on the contrary, have their testes 
drawn up internally,? so that if any class of such 
creatures tends naturally to abound in semen, they 
are always wanting to have sexual intercourse. Thus 
in females it is the descent of the uterus which 
encourages copulation, whereas in males itis the 
abawinis up of the testicles. 
~ We have'now stated the cause on account of which 
superfetation does not occur at all in some animals, 
why it does occur in others, and why these can some- 
times bring the nourishing of the fetation to comple- 
tion, sometimes not ;. and what is the cause why of 
such animals some are prone to sexual intercourse 
and others not. 

* Cf. T17 b 25, 718 a 6 ff. ' ® See 717 b.10 ff. 
451 

TT4 a 

774 b 

ARISTOTLE) 1} A 1480 

"Evia b€ Trav emuxvioKopevav Kab mohov xpovov 
Svadevrovons Ths dxelas dvvarat TH Kur Lara. 
extpepew, 6 oowv OTE p[LATUKOV TE TO ‘yevos €orl Kal 

20 p17) TO CGpa peyeBos Eyer Kal t@v ToAvToKwY 
cori: dia puev yap TO ToAvTOKEV edpyywpiav exer 
TiS | vorépas, dia 5€ TO omeppatiKov elvat’ odd 
mpoterat Tepitrwpa Tis Kabdpoews: dia dé TO pa) 
TO o@pa peyebos EXE, dAAd. mciovt Ady THY 
kdbapow drrepBadrcw THS cis. TO KUNLO Tpodips, 

25 SUvaTai. TE guviardvan" Coa xal Borepov Kat TadT” 
exTpeper. ert 0 at dorépae TOV ToLovre. ov 
ouppepvKacr id Td Tmeptetvae, epitTmpa, Tihs 
Kkabdpoews. toto dé Kau emt yuvarKkay 787 
ovpBeBnxev: yiverau yap TLOL Kvovoais «dapors 
Kal dia réAovs. aAAa Tatrais pev mapa dvow 

30 (810 BAdmres tO KUynpa), Tots S€ ToLOvTOIs TOV 
Ciwv Kata dvow cttw yap TO cBpua cvvéornKev 
e€ apyfs, olov ro TOv SacuTddav* Tobro yap emt- 
Kuioxerat TO CHov* ovTE yap Tov peydAwy eri 
modvToKov TE (modvayidés yap, Ta de mrohvoxwOyj 
mroAvToKa,) Kat OTEppariKdy.. dnAot o 7 Sacvrns: 

35 drrepBaMer yap TOU TPLXBPATOS TO NAbos: Kat 
yap bro TOUS sm08as Kal. €vTOos Tay ydbwy tob7 
exel tpixas povov TaV dur. a) dé Sagvrns on- 
petov mAnOovs mepittw@patos €or, S10, Kal TeV 

1 cunotdava A.-W.: avvicracba vulg... 

* T use (a), (6), and (ce) to mark respectively the same 
characteristic all through this passage for clarity of reference. 
@ Lit., ‘is seminal’’; 7.¢e., the males abound in semen and 
the females in menstrual fluid (which is unconcocted semen). 
» i.e., the embryos produced by way of superfetation. 

452 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. v. 

Some of those animals in which superfetation 
occurs are able to bring to completion the nourishing 
of their fetations even when there is a long interval 
between the copulations ; these are animals which 
(a)* belong to some kind which is abundant in semen,* 
(6) are not large in bodily size,:and (c) are among 
those which produce numerous offspring ; the reason 
being that (c)* because they produce numerous off- 
spring their uterus is roomy, (a) because they are 
abundant in semen they discharge a great deal of 
residue by way of evacuation, (b) because they are not 
large in bodily size; but the evacuation exceeds by a 
larger measure the nourishment which goes to the 
fetation, they are able to cause young animals to take 
shape at the later stage too® and to bring their 
nourishing to completion. Also, in such animals the 
uterus does not close up; because there is a surplus 
amount of residue by way of evacuation. This has 
occurred to our knowledge in the case of women: in 
some women evacuation continues throughout the 
time of pregnancy. In them, however, it is contrary 
to nature (that is why it injures the fetation) ; but in 
the animals we are discussing it is natural, because 
that is the way in which their body took shape from 
the beginning. The hare is an example of this. 
This is an animal in which superfetation occurs, for 
(6)* it is not one of the large animals, (c) it produces 
numerous offspring (since it is fissipede, and fissipede 
animals produce numerous offspring), and (a) it is 
abundant in semen. This is shown by its hairiness. 
It has an excessive amount of hair ; indeed, it has 
hair under the feet and inside the jaws, and is the 
only animal which does so, This hairiness is a sign 
that it has a large amount of residue ; and for this 

453 

774b 

VI 5 

f 4 1ADARISTOTLE IT ANII“AD 

avOpuirrwv ot daceis tideh padternorrsncbt Kal moAv- 
Bireppiot peaddov etot TOV Aelwy. “6 ev odv Saaowous 
0. pev Tay Kunudtov aren TodAdKes. hey a 
d€ mpoterat TereReLanpeva, TOV TEKVWV. 
Tév d€ Cwordkwy Ta psy amen aTpoterau, toa 
Ta S€ rereAcwpéva, TA ev povuxa rereAewupeve 
Kal Ta Sixnrd, Tav be moAvaxiBOv dteAq 7a" moNAd. 
Tovrou 8° aitwov OTL Ta pev MeVUXA MovOTOKE éort, 
Ta, de Suynrd j oT] Sat i] ketvat ere 7, mont, 

10 pddiov S€ 7a dAiya exrpédew. | Tav 5é ToAvoyiddv 

doa areAh tikret, mdvra TodvTéKa* S10 véa pev 
ovta SvvaTat TO Kunpara Tpepew,” bray. 8 adtnO 
Kat AdBy péyebos, ov duvapévou 700 -ow@paros 

extpédew, mpoterar Kabarep Ta cKWANKOTOKA TOV 
Cdiwv. Kai yap rovtwv Td pev adiapOpwra oxedov 

15 yerva, Kabdmep addy dpxtos A€wv, mapamAy- 

a k 2 1f. STADES? 

aiws 8 eva Kal tov dw: tudda de ava 
/ e “~ / \ ” "4 uA hy , ; 
axed0v, olov raira te Kal ru Kbwy AvKos Adds. 
poovov dé) moduréKov dv 1% bs TeAcLoTOKEl, Kat 
2 G A rigs : A pee ae fee 
emaAAdtTret TodTo jidvov: moAvToKe? pev yap ws 
Ta ToAvaxiOy,” SuxnAdov 8 €ati Kat pavuxov: ciot 
KON: EXR uv“ +} 

20 yap mov pwvuxes tes. . ToAvTOKEL ev odv bia TO 

7a. P: om. vulg. 
m dua PS: exrpepew vulg. 
3 ds todvexidA LZ: as brodveysien PY. 

@ But see the proviso at 771 b 5 ff. 

> i.e., in an eager condition. 

° See H.A. 499 b 12. The solid-hoofed is the more un- 
usual variety. 

454 

7 

- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. v.-vr. 

same reason, too,.men that are hairy are more prone 
to sexual intercourse and have more semen than men 
that are smooth. As for the hare, often some.of its 
fetations are. imperfect ; others of its offspring, 
however, it brings to birth in a perfected state. 
Among the Vivipara, some bring their young to VI 
birth in a perfect, some in an imperfect, state. To nepal 
the former. class belong the solid-hoofed and the at birth. 
cloven-hoofed animals, to the latter most of the 
fissipede animals.’ The reason for this'is thatthe solid- 
hoofed animals produce one at:a birth, the cloven- 
hoofed animals produce either one or two, in general, 
and it is an easy matter to bring the nourishing of 
a few to completion. . Those fissipede animals which 
produce their offspring in an imperfect.state, all pro- 
duce numerous offspring, and on that account while 
the fetations are quite young they are able to nourish 
them, but once they haye advanced in growth and 
have attained some size their bodies are unable to 
bring the nourishing of them to completion, and so 
discharge them just as the larva-producing animals 
do,? for indeed their young, like the larvae, are practi- 
cally unarticulated when born, e .g., those of the fox, 
the bear, the lion, and similarly with some of the 
others ; moreover, practically all of them are blind, 
e.g., the ones just mentioned, and in addition those of 
the dog, the wolf, and the jackal. The only animal 
which produces numerous offspring that are perfectly 
formed is the pig ; thus it is the only one which has a 
footing in both classes : (a) it produces numerous off- 
spring, as the fissipede animals do, but (0) it is a species 
which is cloven-hoofed and solid-hoofed—for solid- 
hoofed pigs exist, as we know.* It produces numer- 
ous offspring because the nourishment available for 

455 

‘NRISTOTDEL OFT UDI AO 

TIV eis TO péyeBos tpopny eig THY oTEppwariKny 
drroxpiveoBat Tepitrmow* TOTO yap. se fisdogy 

dv" ovK Exet péyeos. dua be Kal padov , Bomrep 
dppoByroby TH poe TH Trav Havixer, Ben ddy 
COTW, Sud. pev obv TOTO Kal povoToKeEl ToTE. Kal 
25 Siroxet. Kai modvutoKet Ta TA€iora,. excrpe per & Ls els 
TéAos dua THY TOO oeparos ebBootar: EXEL yap “os 
mleipa, yn puTots t beavyy Kal Sayedt Tpopyy. Veils 
Téerovor 8 dteAq Kal Tuprd Kal Tay. opvibeow 
TWES, , Ogot mohvtoKovow avray, pay oopdrey 
exovTes peyebos, olov Kopavn KiTTa. or. 
yeAuddves, Kal TOV ddvyoroKovwrwy (6 6oa pr SaiprH 
30 Tpodiy OUVERTIKTEL Tots TEKVOUS, olov parra Kal 
Tpvyav Kal Tmepworepa. Kal dia TobTo Ta yert~ 
Sovev eav Tig ert vewv oYTw prion 7 opparra, - 
Taw dyidlovrat” ywopevav yap ara nip eee 
peeveny pbetpovran,” didmep pdovrat Kal n 
35 vovow €& dpx7s. dAws de mpotepet Lev Tis Te- 
Aevoyovias Sua THv aSuvaplav rod exrpédew, atedH 

774 b 

1 dy P: om. vulg. 2 wore P: om. wulg. 
3 dOctpovrar Y : dbetpovor P': dbeiperat vulg. 

<4 

@ The distinction which Aristotle makes here psastisiMe 
to the distinction now made between nidicolous birds (those 
here described) and nidifugous birds. The former are born 
blind, the latter can see at birth. 

e Or; magpie. ¢ See table of birds, Pi - 368.) ‘ 

4 i.e., not enough yolk, 

* The origin of this story is not clear. It cannot be true 
if ‘‘ put out” means “ removed,” but lesser degrees of injur 
might be followed by repair and recovery of function. iN 
somewhat similar phenomenon is the well-known “‘ Wolftian 
regeneration ’’ in amphibia, where after removal of the lens 
of the eye a new lens) regenerates from the margin of the. 
iris, i.e., from a place other than that of its normal origin, 

456 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. v1. 

increase of size is secreted to yield seminal residue— 
since, for a solid-hoofed animal, the pig is not large 
in size ; atthe same time and more commonly, it is 
cloyen- -hoofed, as though it were at odds with the 
nature of the solid-hoofed animals. On account of 
this, then, it not only produces sometimes one off- 
spring, and two, but also and for the most part it 
produces numerous offspring, and it brings’ their 
nourishing to completion because of its fine physical 
condition: it is like a rich soil which can provide 
plants, with sufficient and indeed abundant nourish- 
ment. 

_ The offspring of some. of the. birds aed are ¢ hatched 
in an imperfect state, and blind*; viz.,of those which 
lay numerous eggs although they themselves are 
small in physique—e. .g-, the crow, the jay, sparrows, 
and swallows ®; and of those birds which lay few 
eggs and yet do not provide inthe egg abundant 
nourishment ¢ for the chick—e.g., the ring-dove, the 
turtle-dove, and the pigeon. And-on this account, 
if the eyes of a swallow are deliberately put out while 
the bird is still young, they recover, because the 
injury is inflicted during the process of their forma- 
tion and not after its completion ; that is why they 
grow and spring up afresh.’ In general, then, the 
reason why offspring are born early before their 
formation is perfected, is because of inability to bring 
their nourishing to completion ; and the reason why 
they are born in an imperfect state is because they 
viz., the young skin. This may happen many times in 
succession if the experiment is repeated. The connexion 
between regeneration and embryonic growth is well grasped 
by Aristotle, but there are of course some animals, such as 

the newts, where the power of regeneration is retained 
throughout adult life (ef. H.A. 508 b 4 ff.). 

457 

| A VARISTOBLED 7 (1499 

774 b : 
dé yiverau dia 7d mpotepeiv. SiAov S€ TobTo Kat 
75a ent Taviénrapjvwv: di yap TO aed ‘elvar moA- 
AdKus Evia adbrdv yiverar obd€ Tods We pabs éxovra 

ma  dinpOpwyevovs, -olov’ Wrwv kal’ pe Kernpeny, 

GAN’ eravéavopuevors is gt Kat Biodor TOA, 

TOV TowvTwr. : ni 

Diverau de dudorpa paNov ey. tots dvOpdrous 

5 7a Gppeva, Tay Onréwy, év 6 Tots dAdo, ovbev 
paArov. airvov 3 dre €v tots’ avOpctrors r0Ad 
diaheper TO dppev Tod OjAeos Hh Deppdrnre THs 
picews, 510 KUNTUKET Epa €oTt Kvovpeva Ta GppEva. 

tov Onréwr: bud 6€ 70 Kwvetoban Ppaderen t paMov- 
edpOaprov" yap 76, véov Sud. riy dobeverav. Sia 

> : ¥ 
10 THY avrny dé radrny airiay Kal zehevodrat 7a 

Orca, Tots dppeaw ovx opoiws: at yap torépae 
~ adra@y ovx Opoiws €xovow: | ev Oe Tois), adAots 
labous dpotws TeAcodTau: ovdev yap dorepet’ ms 
Odea TOV dippeveov @omepy" ev tais’’ 
ev pev yap TH penrtpt ev mA€iove xpoven buaxpiveras 
TO OAAv Tod dppevos, eEeADobar' 8e mdvra mpo- 
TEpov emireAcirat, ofoy mBq Kal aKpn Kal yipas, 
tots @jAcow 7 Tois appeow: “atherottee vee 

1 edpBaprov PZ: edOpaveror vulg. 

2 supplevi; quoniam. matrices earum sunt otumdiuak 
modum divisum (leg. diversum 3) v,1. sunt diversae sec. modum 
eorum). in aliis autem animalibus non apparet diversitas in 
complemento creationis feminarum et masculorum quoniam 
non est in feminis diminutio a maribus X :. in aliis,autem 
animalibus similiter; nichil- enim tardat femella plus mas- 
culo, sicut_in mulieribus. Gul.. Moerb. teste, Bussemaker ; 
similia ex Gul. vers. suppleverat Schneider, ed. H,A. vol. iy. 
443, 

3 eéeModar Peck: e&eABdvra PSYZ: e&eAPdvTww Bekker. 
458 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. v1. 

are born early. This is plain, indeed, in the case of 
seven months’ children: in some of them, when they 
are born, because they are imperfect, even the pass- 

es (e.g., those of the ears and nostrils) are often not 
yet fully. articulated ; as the child grows, however, 
they become articulated. Many such individuals 
survive. | 

In human beings, more males are born deformed 
than females; in other animals, there is no pre- 
ponderance either way. The reason is that in human 
beings the male is much hotter in its nature than 
the female, On that account male eal eits tend 
to move about more than female ones,’ and owing to 
their moving about they get broken more, since a 
young creature can easily be destroyed owing to its 
weakness.’ And it is due to this self-same cause that 
the perfecting of female embryos is inferior to that 
of male ones, (since their uterus is inferior in con- 
dition.» In other animals, however, the perfecting 
of female embryos is not inferior to that of male 
ones: they are not any later in developing than the 
males, as they are)° in women, for while still within 
the mother, the female takes longer to develop 
than the male does*; though once birth has taken 
place everything reaches its perfection sooner in 
females than in males—e.g., puberty, maturity, old 
age—because females’ are weaker and colder in 

* Cf. HLA. 584 a 26 ff. 

.» i.e. it is colder, because the nature of women is colder 
than that of other female animals, as is stated immediately 
above, and below; cf. also 776 a 10, where women are said 
to be alone in suffering from uterine affections, again owin 
to lack of heat, resulting in inability to concoct; an 
775 a 30 ff. 

© See app. crit. # Cf. H.-A. 583 b 22 ff. 

459 

775 a 

ARISTOTLE! i! / 3!) 40 

15 €ore Kal Puxporepa Ta Orydea TH guow, ‘kat det 

drohapBavew & Gomep. avarrn play ‘aa TH Onddrara 

Vier 
PuoLKyy éow ev ody Siaxpiverau bua THY pe : 

xpornra Bpadews (7) yap Suakpeats. mehis . €oti, 
metre. 5° %) Oepudorns, evremrov d€ TO Yepporepov), 
> ‘ \ \ \ > / ‘ / ure 
extos be did 7H. acbévevav TAX) ouvamres -mpos 
20 THY dcpeny Kal TO yipas: mavra yap. Ta, Adrrw 
™pos 70, TéAOs epxerat Dorror, Gomep Kal. ev. Tots 
Kata Téxvynv Epyots, Kal ev-rois tro dvaews ovv- 
werapevors. dia TO ‘eipnpevov 8 airwov Kai év 

pev tots avOpwmois Ta Siduporokoupeva OFAv kat 

appev ATTOv ouheras, ev d€ Tots dMors obbev 
25 Yrtev: Tots pev yap Tapa puow TO icodpapieiv, 
odK ev icous Xpovois yevoperns rhs dvaxpicews, 
aAN’ avayken TO appev verepey 9H TO OnAv- mpo- 
TIPS ev d€ Tois aAAots ov Tapa. puow. ovpBaives 
d¢ Kai Siahopa repli Tas KUnGEIS emi TE TOV av- 
Opdimwv Kat emt tov ddAwv Cawv Ta pev yap 
30 edOnvet GAAov Tots owpact Tov mAcoToV xpovor, 
Tov dé yuvask ay at moAAat Suapopovot wept TH 
Kuno. gore pv. ody airiyte,tovrov' Kat dia 
tov Biov: édpaiar yap obcav mdAciovos. yépovet 
TEpLTTWpPATOS, Emel Ev ols EOveo. TovNTLKOS 6 TOV 
yuvairav Bios, ov8? % Kdnows Spotws éenidndéds 
35 €o7l, TikTOVal Te padiws KaKel Kal mavTayoD at 

1 rovrov Platt: rovrwv vulg. 

* Of. 767 b 9, and see Introd. § 13.- 
460 

i i ile 

es ee CC 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vt. 

their nature; and we should look upon the female 
state as being as it were a deformity, though one 
which occurs in the ordinary course of nature.?_ While 
it is within the mother, then, it develops slowly on 
account of its coldness, since development is.a sort of 
concoction, concoction is effected by heat, and if a 
is hotter its concoction is easy; when, however, 
it is free from the mother, on,account of its weakness 
it quickly approaches its maturity and_old age, since 
inferior things all reach their end more quickly, and 
this applies to those which take their shape under the 
hand of Nature just as much as to the products of the 
arts and crafts. The reason which I have just stated 
aceounts also for the fact that (a) in human beings 
twins survive less well if-one is male and the other 
female, but (5) in other animals they survive just as 
well: in human beings it is contrary to nature for the 
two sexes to keep pace with each other, male and’ 
female requiring unequal periods for their develop- 
ment to take place ; the male is bound to be late or 
the female early ; whereas in the other animals equal 
speed is not contrary to nature. There is also a 
difference between human beings and the other 
animals with regard to gestation. Other animals are 
most of the time in better physical condition, whereas 
the majority of women suffer discomfort in connexion 
with gestation. Now the cause of this is to some ~ 
extent attributable to their manner of life, which is 
sedentary, and this means that they are full of resi- 
due ; they have more of it than the other animals. 
This is borne out by the case of those tribes where 
the women live a life of hard work. With such women 
gestation is not so obyious, and they find delivery an 
easy business, And so do women eyerywhere who 

461 

VWARISTOTLE) PT Aji Ag 
775 a . . . | r 
eiwOviat movely: avadloKer “yap. 6 mdvos 7a \EptT- 
Tobpara, rats s eOpaiais € evuTrdpyer 7oAAG Toudra 
dud ay drroviay Kal TO yi, yiveoBae i poets 
175 b Kvovaais; % Te @dis emizovds. €oTW: 6 mdvos 
yopwater TO med pa wore Svvacbau Kar EXEW, ev @ 
TO TikTew €oTi pydios 7 q xadet@s. ore pen, oov, 
’ Morep eipyrat, Kai Tadra ovpPadrAopeva mpods Tv 
-  6tadhopav tod madous Tots dAAows Cpois Kat tats 

5 yuvarki, pdduota 6° ort Tots pev adrav dAlyr 
ylverat Kd0apots, Tots. 8’ odK émidm)os. dAws, Tais 
dé yovaug mAcloTn TeV Sun, wore Ha) yivoperns 
THs erekpioews dud. Thy Konow tais pev Tapaxnv 
Tape et: Kal yap pn Kvovoats, OTav ai Kabdpoets 
}2) ylyveyr ar, vocot cupBatvovaw* Kat 70 mp@rov 
10 d€. Taparrovrat guMaBodoar' paddrov at. mdetorat 
TOY yuvakav: 76 yap. Kina kaddew per. Sivarar — 
ras Kabdpoes, Sia puxpdtyra dé oddev avadtoKer 
TAHV0s Tob Trepirreparos TO Tp@tov, vorepov’ Se 
Koupilet peraAapBdvov: ev d€ Tots dMous Lepots ud 
15 TO oAtyov elvas oUppeTpov yiverat TPs Thy abénow 
TOV euBpdwr, Kal dvadokopeveny TOV TEpLTTW- 
pdtv TOv eumodilovtwy Thy Tpopny ednpepel Tots 
owpact paddov. Kal ev tots evddpors Tov adrov 
TpoTov Kal ev Tots dpyiow. dn dé peyddAwy 
ywonevwy TOV Kunudtwv, doous pnkéet. ovpPaiver 

1 ovAdaPotoa P: Pse eaaergee “_ 

* Cf. H.A, 587 a1 ff., and see De somno et vig. 456 a 16 
“ strength is required for causing ‘ movement,’ and strength 

462 | 

GENERATION: OF ANIMALS, IV. vr. 

are used to hard work. The reason is that the effort 
of working uses up the residues, whereas sedentary 
women have a great deal of such matter in their 
bodies owing to the absence of effort, as well as, to 
the cessation. of the menstrual discharges during 
gestation; and they find the pains of delivery severe. 
Hard work, on the other hand, gives the breath 
(pneuma) exercise, so that they can hold it ¢; and it 
is this which determines whether delivery is easy or 
difficult. All these things, then, as we have said, are 
in their way factors producing the difference in gesta- 
tion as between women and the other animals ; but 
the chiéf one is that whereas in some animals there 
is but little: menstrual evacuation, and in others no 
visible evacuation at all; in women it is greater in‘ « 
volume than in any other animal; ; and the result 
of this is that when it is not being discharged owing 
to pregnancy it causes them trouble (and indeed even 
apart from pregnancy, when the menstrual discharge 
fails to take place diseases are the result) ; and most 
women are troubled in this way rather more at the 
begi , Just after they have conceived, because 
although the fetation is able to prevent the evacua- 
tion, yet as it is so small it does not at first use up any 
amount of the residue ; afterwards, when it does take 
up some of it, it relieves the trouble. In the other 
animals, however, as there is but little of it, its amount 
is just right for the growth of the embryos ; and as 
the residues which obstruct the nourishment get used 
up, the animals are in better physical condition. The 
same applies to water-animals and to birds. The 
reason why some animals are no longer in good 

is supplied by the holding of the breath.” Cf. also’ M.A. 
703 a 18,9; P.A. 659 b 18, 667 a 29; and App. B §§ 22 ff. 

463 

(ARISTOTLE |) 
775 b 
20 <drpopia TOV owuaTwv, airvov To Thy ‘avénow | 

Tob KUTaros deiafat mAciovos 7" THs TmEpurtew- : 

pariKhs Tpodijs. odiyaus dé Tit TOV yevaucev 

éArvov exew Ta odpara ovpBaiver Kvovoais” 

adrat &° etoly Ooais piKpa Ta Tepirreopara ev 7 

compart, wore KaTavadicoKkecBar pera THs eis 70 

€uBpvov Tpopijs. 

VII 25 Tlepi be Tis Kadoupevns pvAns p pnréov, u) yiverau 
pev oAvyaKts. Tats yovarki, yiverau 8€ riot TOUTO TO 
ma0os Kvovoais. TUKTOVAL yap 6 kadodar (boda, 
707 yap ouveBn Tet yuvaukt ouyyevowevy _7@ 
avdpi Kat do€aon ovAdaBetv, TO pev m™p@rov 6 TE 
oyKos ndgdvero Tis yaorpos Kat Tada eyiyvero 

30 Kara Adyov, émet d€ 6 xpdvos iy. Tob TOKOV, OUT 
éruxrev ovTe 6 GyKos €Adtrwy éyiveto, GAN’ ery 
Tpia y) rérTapa ovTw duereAev, éws Svcevre ias 
yevouerns Kal kwdvvevoaca b bn’ adras ereKe ‘ode 
ye Kadovor pvrAnv. Ere be Kat ovyKaraynpdoKet 
Kal ovvarroOyioket Todto TO 7abos. Ta be Ovpale 

35 e€idvTa TOV TowovTwY yiverat oKXnpa ovrws GOTE 
pores dvaxonreabat Kal ovdnpw. Trepl pev obdv TAS 
Tob mabous airias etpyrau ev Tots mpoBAnuacew: 

776 a mdaxe yap TaUTOY TO KUQLG ev TH LNTPE OTTEp EV 
Tots éyropevois TO pwduvopeva,” Kat ov dia €p- 
porTnTa, Womep TwWEs gacw, aAa, padrov. dv 
aobéveav. Oepudtyntos (ove yap % dais adv- 

1 # PZ: om. yulg. 2 pod. codd. 

* The uterine hydatiform mole, deciduoma, etc., are 

- tumours of the uterine wall; they occur spontaneously and 

can be produced experimentally by mechanical stimulus, 
given the right glandular conditions. ' 

464 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vi-vu. 

physical. condition when the fetations are becom- 
ing sizable is that the, growth of the fetation 
needs more nourishment than that afforded by the 
residue. There are some few women who are in 
better physical condition during pregnancy. This 
occurs with those whose bodies. contain but small 
amounts of residue, and as a result this is com- 
pletely used up together with the nourishment that 
goes to the embryo. A . ; . 
We now have to treat of the mola uteri2 as'it is VII __ 
called. This occurs in women occasionally only, but it “!* “*7- 
does occur in some during pregnancy. They bring 
forth a “ mola.” It has been known to happen, in 
the ease of a woman who has had intercourse 
thinks she has conceived, that her figure has increased 
to begin with, and all the rest has proceeded as ex- 
pected, but when the time for her delivery was at 
bomducehe thas neither brought anything to birth nor 
Te as the size of her girth decreased ; instead, she 
continued in that condition for three or four years, 
till she was seized with dysentery which brought her 
to a dangerous pass, and then she has produced a 
fleshy mass, known as a “ mola.” Sometimes, also, 
this condition lasts on into old age and persists until 
death. In such instances the objects which make 
their way out of the body are so hard that it is diffi- 
cult to cut them in two even by means of an iron edge. 
Well, I have spoken in the Problems ® of the cause of 
this occurrence ; the case of the fetation in the womb 
is exactly the same as that of meat, when it is under- 
cooked ; and it is due not to heat, as some people 
allege, but rather to weakness of heat (because it 
looks as though Nature in these cases suffers from 

> This reference cannot be found. 
465 

176 a 

ARISTOTLE’ OV ASA AD 

varetv Kal od dvvacbat Tedevoat 0d enbetvar 

5 TH yeveoe mépas" 810 al ovykataynpdoker 4 

Tro Eepever xXpdvov" ovre yap ws Tetecopevov" 
080” cs mdpaay aAAdr prov exeu THY iow): Tis 
yap oKAnporntos x arreypia aitia: drepia ydp THs 
KaL 1 pedhuvats* €oTw. 

 Atroptay oS Exel, dud. tt mor’ ev Tots d Mors oid 

10 yiverar Caous, et oy TL dprrav AdAnOev. aitov de 

VIII 15 

20 

det vopilew dtu povov dsarepikdv eat yur) TOV 
dAAwy Cwowv, Kat mept tas Kabdpoeis mAcovdler 
Kat od dvvatau mérrew adrds* orav obv ex dvo- 
mémrov ikpuados ovorh TO KUNA, TOTE yiveran 7) 
Kadovpevn pan ev tats yovarelv edrAdyws 7) paint 
7) povats’. 

To dé yaha yiverau trois OiAcow doa Lusnrdet 
ev adrots XprjouLov pev ets Tov Xpovov ‘Tov TOO 
tOKOU, Tijs yap tpodiis xdpw | Avro Tis Odpale 
erroinaev 1 pvous Tots S@ous, WoT ovr éMetrrew 
avTo ev TO xpovep rovTw odbev ov? drrepBdMew 
odbev: OTrEp. Kal daiverar oupntaroy, av, 
yevnra Tapa vow. Tots pev ov dois ie 
dud TO TOV xpovov eva. THs. KUnTEWS: elvat, mpos 
TobTov amav7ad Tov Katpov 7 mé{us adrod: Tots & 
avOpwrrots €rret TrAcious oi ypdovol, KaTa TOV TPA@TOV 
avayKaiov vmdapyew: 10 mpo Tav. énta pnvadv 
dxpynorov To ydAa rais yuvoréi, Tore S dH yiverar 

1 rerekeopevoy P: tereAcuwpevov vulg. z pod. codd. 

59 . 
* xpjoyov pév, because although it serves a purpose, it 

is also (ll. 25 ff.) due to necessity in the sense that its forma- 
tion follows. inevitably from the circumstances, as Aristotle 
explains. 

> See 772 b 5 ff. and H.A. 584 a 33. 

466 

——__. = +. >. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vo.—viit. 

some inability, and is unable to. complete her work 
and to bring the process of formation to its consum- 
mation ; that is why the mola lasts on into old age or 
at any rate for a considerable time, for in its nature 
it is neither a finished product nor yet something 
wholly alien); since the cause of its hardness is the 
lack of concoction, just as underdone ‘meat is another 
instance of lack of concoction.» 

But there is a puzzle here... Why is it that this 
phenomenon.does not occur in the other animals ? 
(unless of course it does, but has entirely escaped 
observation). We must take the reason to be that 
alone of all animals women are liable to uterine affec- 
tions’; they produce an excess of menstrual evacua- 
tions and eannot concoct them ; and so, when the © 
fetation has been “ set,” formed out of a liquid which 
' is difficult to concoct; then what is called the mola is 
produced ; and thus.it is not surprising that this takes 
place chiefly in women if not exclusively in them. 

. Milk is produced towards the time of parturition VIII 
in those female animals which are internally vivipar- “"*: 
ous, and it is (1) of a useful and serviceable quality,” 
for Nature has provided animals with it so that they 
may nourish their young externally, and she has so 
arranged that it is neither deficient. nor excessive in 
any way at that time; this we actually observe to 
obtain unless some accident contrary’ to nature 
occurs. In the case of the other animals, as there is 
but a single period of gestation, the concoction of the 
milk coineides with that ; in man, however, as there 
are more periods than one,” the milk must of neces- 
sity be available at the earliest of the possible dates ; 
hence in women the milk, which is useless until seven 
months are up, at that point becomes useful and 

467 

776 b 

ARISTOTLE 

25 Xprjotpov. evAdyws dé ovpBaiver Kat dua tiv e€€ 

dvdyrens airiav TTETEHLEVOV els TOUS tehevraiovs 
xXpovous' TO pev yap mp@tov % Tod Tovovrov 
TEPLTTWLATOS Grr OK plots els THY Tav eu Bptwy 
avaXiokerat yevegu: mdvrwv 8 % Tpopiy TO 
yAvadrarov Kal TTETEULEVOV, aor’ adarpouperns 

30 THs Tovadrys Suvdpews avayKn TO Aowrov dAwupov 

yivesBau Kai S8oxvpov. TeAcovpevwy Sé TOV KvN- 
pdtwv mAréov TO Tepirrwpa Td Trepuywopevov 
(<Aarrov yap. TO dvaXioxdpevor)” Kal yhoxbrepor, 
ovK dparpovpevon 6 dpolws Tod eUTEMTOU, *od ya, 

ere eis TAdoW TOO eu Bpvov yiyver au 7 daravn, dW’ 

35 €ls puKpav avenow, @orep €oTNKOS dy dud 70 

téAos €xew TO EuBpvov €or. yap Tus Kal KU7)- 
praros TeAeiwous. Sidmep e€€pxerau Kal weraBaAdrer 
Ti yeveow, Ws éxov TA adTod Kal odKEeTL AapBaver 
TO pt) adTOd, ev @ Kaip@ ‘yiverar 76 yada xpHotpov. 

Eis 8€ tov dvw tomov Kai tovs paorods avaA- 

'f ‘ ‘ > > ~ / ~ ’ / 
5 A€yerar dia THv €€ apyns Ta€w THs ovoTdoews. 

~ \ id ~ 

TO pev yap avw Tod trolwparos TO KUpLov TOU 
~ lod ‘ ~ 

faov® eori, TO 5€ KdTw TOTS THs Tpodhs Kal TOO 
~ > 

TEp\TTwMMATOS, OTWS doa TopevTiKa TOV Cawy ev 

* sic interpunxit Bussemaker, 

2 pro ov yap éru. . . xpyomov 776 b 3 habet & quoniam 
non indigetur ea. non ergo accipitur in illo tempore Soc 
avciptebatur ante ex lacte. vide 777 a 22-27. 

8 ris Cwis coni. Btf. 4 rémos P: om. vulg. 

® Of. P.A. 676 a 35. 

® Aristotle here notes correctly that growth proceeds long 
after differentiation has ceased. 

¢ 4,¢., as well as a creature which has reached an indepen- 

468 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vut. 

serviceable. But the fact that it is fully concocted 
at the final stages is due also (2) to another cause— 
the necessary cause, which is what we should expect, 
for, to begin with, the secretion of this particular 
residue is used up for the formation of the embryos ; 
arid in every animal the nourishment is the sweetest 
_ ingredient they possess and the. most concocted, so 
that when this sweet substance is drawn off, what 
remains is bound to be briny and ill-sayoured.? 
When, however, the fetations are,approaching their 
completion, then there is more surplus. residue, 
because less of it is being used up, and it is sweeter, 
since the well-concocted residue is no longer being 
drawn off to the same extent: it is no longer being 
expended upon the moulding of the embryo, but upon 
the small growth which it is making,” as though the 
embryo had by now, being completed, reached a 
stationary point (since a fetation, too, has its point 
of completion.)° That is why it makes its way out, 
and changes over to anether process of formation as 
now possessing all that belongs to it, and it no 
longer takes what does not belong to it?; and that 
is the time when the milk becomes serviceable. 

The milk collects in the upper part of the body, in 
the breasts, and this is accounted for by the original 
order of the body’s construction. The part of the 
body above the diaphragm is the controlling part of 
the animal. (The part below is the place for the 
nourishment and the residue, in order that those 
animals which move about may haye within them a 

dent state of existence ; and even the wind has its yéveo.s and 
d0ics (778 a 2), where see note; and also cf. 737 b 9. 
* This remark is obscure, and the sentence may be an 
interpolation. See the parallel passage, 777 a 22 ff. 
469 

776 b 

ARISTOTLE 106) > 

avrois éxovra THY THs Tpophs adrdprevay _peera~ 
Badr rods Témovs. evTedev Sé Kal'% omEpparict) 
10 mepirrmots drroKpiverat dea TH elpnyevny “airiay 
ev Tots Kar’ dpxas Adyats, fore. be 78 Te Ov 
dppevioy TEepitTwUA Kal Td. Korrapapyec. Tots, Orpeow 
aipaructis dvcews. | TovTou 8°. aipxm Kal Ta@v 
prcBav 1 7 Kapdia* adrn 8 €v Tots poptous tovrous. 
S10 mp@trov evradéa' dvaryKatoy “ylyveoBau Thy 
15 peraBohiy ertdnrov THs TovadTys mepirrdboews. 
Svomep at re dwyal petaBdMovar Kal TeV dppévav 
kat tav Onde@v, dTav dpywvTar ‘onéppa. pépew 
() yap apx7 THs paivijs evred0ev: aAdoia dé yiverat 
aAXoiov yevopevou Too Kwoovros) Kal Ta TrEpt TOUS 
pacrovds alperau Kal Tois dppeow emdiros, [dv 
20 8€. tots O7Acow: d1d yap TO KATO Thy Exxpow 
yiveoBau mohAny. Kevos 6 TOmosS syivera Oo TOV 
pacta@v avrais Kat,.copudds.  dpoiws dé Kal Tots 
KdTw Tovs pacTods exovow. yiverar pev odv 
eridnros Kal 7 pwvr) Kal Ta TEpl TOUS aoTOdS Kal 
ev Tots aMois Caos Tots eprelpois mepl exaoTov 
25 VEVOS emt d¢, TOV aviparany Suadéper mActorov. 
airuoy d¢ 70 mActornv. <lvou THY mepirrwow Tots 
Onreor tovTaIs Ta&v. Onr€wv Kal Tots dppeor TV 
appéevay Ws Kara péyebos [Tats wev THY TOV KaTa- 
pyvien, tots b€ Thy Tob onépparos mpoeoww].* * 6rav 
obv pt) AapBavy  pev To eu Bpvov TH sii: 

? glossema : om. &. 

* See 738 b 12 ff., 747 a 20. » 4.0.5 Upper. 
470 

w la 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vim. 

sufficient independent supply of nourishment and be 
able to, go about from place to place.) It is from 
here, 9 that the seminal residue is drawn: the 
reason is given in the earlier chapters of our discus- 
sion.* Both the residue in males and the menstrual 
fluid in females are of a bloodlike nature ; now the 
source of the blood and of the blood-vessels is the 
heart, which is situated in these ° parts ; therefore of 
necessity it is here that the change which this sort of 
residue undergoes must be first of all apparent. For 
this reason the voice of both male and female under- 
goes a:change when they begin to produce semen, 
because the source of the voice is there,° and the voice 
changes its quality when that which provides its 
movement does so ;. and further, the parts around the 
breasts rise up plainly in males as well as in females, 
though more so in the latter; since, as there is a 
plentiful excretion of matter downwards in females, 
the region of the breasts becomes empty and spongy ; 
and similarly in the case of those animals whose 
breasts are down below. Of course, this change in 
the voice and in the region of the breasts makes itself 
- evident in the other animals as well—to those who 
have experience of each particular kind; but the 
change is greatest in human beings. The reason is 
that women produce more residue than any other 
female animal,.and, so.do men than other male 
animals, in proportion to their size {this refers to the 
excretion of menstrua] fluid and of semen respect- 
ively]. Thus,'when the embryo no longer absorbs 

© The heart, which is the dpy7 of the organism, is also in 
particular the source of all physical sexual characteristics ; 
see .766. a. 30 ff., and note on 763 b 27. Cf. 787 b 15 e 
preced. See also App. B § 31. 

471 

776 b 

Ti7 a 

‘ARISTOTLE (bf. 640 

30 dmoxptow, Keondy dé Odpale Padilew, dvayKatov 

35 

5 

10 

eis Tovs Kevous TOrr0Us abpoilecbac ro! mépitrwpa 
may, Soourep av Mow emi TOV adray mdpwy. gore 
&° éxdarous To.ovros 6 Tov pacray zomos Ov 
duporepas TAS aittas evend, Te 708 Bedriovoy 
yeyovars: TOLOUTOS Kat ef. avayKns: evrat0a, 
On ouvioTarar Kal yiverau TETTELLLEVN tpogy “Tale 
Caous. THs de _ mepews. € €ort bev AaBeiv Th etpy)- 
pevny airiay, éort 5€ THv évavtiav: evAoyov.. yap 
Kad petlov ov 7d €uBpvov mei Aap Bavew Tpopny, 
dare éAarrov mrepuyweoban qept TOV xpévor Tobrov: 
mérreTat dé Oarrov To éAarrov. is) 

"Ore pev obv €otl TO yara tiv adriv éxov’ piow 
Th amroxploe. e€ ts yiverat Exaorov, dfAov, eipyrar 

de Kal mporepov. yap avrn) Ay 7) tpépovoa Kal 

ef 7} fs ovvore ‘T7Vv yeveow 7 7) pvas. eort d€ TobTO 
*) alwaruct) dypdrns Tots evaipiois” TO yap. ydra 
Te TE L[LEVOV aipd, cor, GAN’ od Srepbappevor. 
‘Epmedorhijs 8 7 ovK opbas PeMURO SY 7 odK 
EU METHVEYKE ToLnoas Ws TO yada” 

pnvos ev dydodrov Sexdrn mov emdero Aevndy. 

oamporns yap. Kat mreypus evavriov, TO $e mov 
camporns TUS cory, To 5€ yada TeV TETEM[LEvODV. 
od ywovra dé ovre OndAalopevais. at Kabdpoeis 

vel 
1 rovros TO LZ: TodTo TO A.-W. 

2 [rd ydda] Diels; 76 afua Kranz. 

a Cf. Hippocrates, 7. pvatos mavdiov 21 (vii. 512 Littré) xai 
és Tas paprpas de OAtyov epxerar dud TOY avréwv prepa 
Teivovot yap és rods pwalods Kal és Tas prrpas pAePia radra TE 
Kal mapanAjova aAAa. 

472 

oth: Chan tiie 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vu. 

this residual secretion but at the same time prevents 
it from making its way out, the whole of the residue 
is bound to collect in the empty spaces which are 
situated on the same passages.*. In each kind of 
animal the place around the breasts is just such an 
empty space, and it is so for both of the two possible 
ns : it was formed such as it is (a) for the sake 
of the. best, and (6) by necessity. And it is precisely 
here that the concocted nourishment for the young 
animals takes shape and is formed. As for its con- 
coction : to explain that, either the reason stated ° 
may be taken, or the opposite one, since it is just as 
reasonable to adopt the view that as the embryo is 
bigger it takes more nourishment, so that there is 
less nourishment left over at this particular time ; 
and’a smaller amount takes less time to concoct. 
Itis:clear that milk is possessed of the same nature 
as the secretion out of which each animal is formed 
(this has in fact been stated already) ¢: the material 
which supplies nourishment and the material out of 
which Nature forms and fashions the animal are one 
and the same.* And this material, in the case of 
blooded animals, is the bloodlike liquid, since milk is 
concocted, not decomposed, blood. As for Empedocles, 
either he was mistaken, or else his metaphor was a 
bad one, when he wrote ® how the milk is formed 

On the eighth moon's tenth day, a whitish pus. 

No; putrefaétion and concoction are opposites, and 
pus is a putrefaction, whereas milk is to be classed 
as something concocted. In the natural course of 

» i.e, that the embryo requires less nourishment. 

© At 739 b 26. @ Cf. T44b 35. 
* Diels, Vorsokr.® 31 B68. 

473 

777 a 

ARISTOTLE OL ANP AANS 

kara dvow, ovTE ovMapBavovos OnAalopevac: Kay 
15 ovMdBwow, dmrooBevvurat . TO) yaaa Ola TO) THY 
avrny elvau gvow tod ydAaktos Kal Tov KaTa- 
penvecoy 7 de dvots od Svvarau Trodvxoety ovTws 
dor’ érrapporepilew, aA’ av ent Oare 
» amoxpuots, avayKatov emt Odrepa’ exActmew, eav 
H1) ) yergrat i <u)" Biavov Kal t mapa ‘TO Ws emt TO OND. 
20 TodTo 6° 7}5n Tapa Pdow- ev yap ois Ha dBuvdrous 
dws € EXE adn’ STRAP HNRES TO Kara dvow eoTt 
TO Ws em TO TOAU. joe shines 
Kadds 5é Ouebprorat ois xpdvois al a) yéveats 
y] Tov Cow: oray yap Sud 7O pueyeOos, punKere 
icavt) a T@ Kvovpevy 1) Sud. rod Sppadod: 7, Tpody}, 
apa.” To ydda yiverat XpyoyLov [mpos THY yivojLevny 
25 Tpopyv |,” Kal ovK elovovons dua 708 dpparod .tpo- 
djs,* oupmimrovow at i reBes Tépt aso kaAovpevos 
dudards €ore Xirebv, Kat dua’ tradra Kat (Tore 
ovpBaiver Ovpale 7. efodos. . vi, Eh enh gaat 
1x “Emi xcedadjy 8 7 yeveots €ott Tots Cabous maow 
u] Kara pvow dia TO TA avw Too dpparod pela 
30 EXE 7 TO Karo. Kabdrrep obv ev » Cuyots 7 HpTnpeva® 
e€ abrod péme: emi TO Bapos. exe be 7. peilen 
aAetov Bapos. re 
Xa be xXpovo. THs Kunoews exdare TOV they 
, OplapLEvor TvyXavovow ws peev em 70 mond Kara 
tovs Biovs* TH yap xpoviwrépwr® Kal Tas yevecets 
35 evAoyov «<lvar xpovwwrépas. od pay Todt y eorly 

ze Peck. * dpa Platt : aAAd, vulg., secl: A.-W. 

8 His oc ; om. Xi: mpos TH Tod yevopevou Tpodynv coni. A. -W. 
GMa . « . yiyynroa (Z7*). yernoomerny . 6. \ cupmintwow 
coni. Bit. (cum | vv. 22-27 conferas 776 a 33 seqq.) 

4 cicevor dia TOO dppadod H TpodH P 

AT 4s 

\ 

i 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. vint.—x. 

epee a no menstrual evacuations.take place during 
» nor do women conceive then; 
if Pp do conceive, the milk dries up, because 
sd nature of the milk is the same as that of the men- 
strual fluid, and Nature cannot produce a plentiful 
enough supply to provide both ; so that if the secre- 
tion takes place in one direction it must fail in the 
other, ‘unless some violence is done contrary to what 
is normal.” And ‘that \ipso facto means something 
contrary to Nature, because in the, ease: of things 
which admit and do not exclude the possibility of 
being other than they are," “normal ’ and “ natural i 
are identical. 
>In the actual birth of the young. ania we head 
another instance of good timing. _ When the nourish- 
ment that passes through the umbilical cord. is no 
longer sufficient for the fetus, owing to its size; at 
that same time the milk is becoming serviceable, and 
when no nourishment is entering by way of the 
umbilical cord, then the blood-vessels to which the 
cord acts as a sheath collapse ; and for these reasons 
and at that time the exit of the fetus takes place. 

The natural manner of birth for all animals is head IX 
first, because they have a larger bulk above the Amms , 
umbilical cord than below it, so that they are sus- foremost. 
pended from it, as it might be in a balance, and the 
heavier side (z.e., the larger parts) goes down. 

The period of gestation is of a definite length for X 
each of the animals, and normally the periods are joneti.e! 
proportionate to the animals’ span of life ; after all, period. 
we should expect those which have a longer life- 
span to take longer over their formation than others. 

5 hic in Z spatium xi vel xii litterarum. 
5 xpoumrépwv P: ypoviww vulg. ~ 
475 

i ARISTOTLE “O10 A ATA 

atrtov, adn’ os el TO 70ND Tobro oupB Kev" Ta 
yap peilw Kat TeAevdrepa Tov vat” ov Kat 
l@or moddv Xpovov, ob ov Ta preily mrdn 
paspoBusrepa. TaVTWV yap dvOpurtos wha eee 
xpovov, anv eAepavros, dow. d&udmaorov 2’ 

5 THY Tretpav: éAarror. 0 €or 78. “yévos Hogs ud 
dvOpurray, 7) 7) TO Tov.  Aopovpey Kal moda { 
airvov. dé Tob pev elvar paxpéBiov oruoby » TO 
Kexpdobar mapamdnotis mpos TOV, TEPLEXOVTA GEpa, 
Kai 80 Ga oupmTTpar arta, pvoucd, mept dy 
Sorepov épodmev, tay dé xpoveov TOV. trept Ty : 

10 Know TO péyeBos TOV yevvenpeveov ov yap pa- 
duov év odiyen Xpove AapeBdvewv ay redetwow tas 
jeyddas ovoTdcets ove Sao ote TOV GAAwY' ds 
etreiv ovBevds. Sid7rep tm7tot eat Ta ovyyerh Or 
Tovrous eAdrras Cavra Xpovoy KBev meta) © 
Tov fev yap eveatatos 0 0 TOKOS, tv de Sei pnvo a 

156 mAetoros. dud THY avray 3° aitiay 70 ABI 
Kal 6 TOV erepdvrav €ott TOKos* SueT7)5° yap. q 
KUnoLs Oia THY drrepBodny Tob HeyeBous. rae 

EdAdyws Sé mdvrwy of ypdvor Kal T&v KYjoEwv 
Kal? yevéoewv kal. trav Blav perpetcba, Bov- 
Aovras Kata pvow Bie * Ady dé ar 

1 zeiotov P: mAclw wus. sat £4 PZ*; Kal, Ta vulg. 
aus & 
Leo | : 

@ This he 2 parently a popular term meaning “ bushy- 
tailed ”’ ; fess 4,491 a1 where “ the pe as they are 
ealled ”’ ae ihe horse, the ass, the mule, ete, of. 755 b 19.) 
> Cf. 767 a 30 ff., and Hippocrates, m7. dépuv vddrwv TémWYV, 
chh. 1-6; and for “ blend,” adem, 7. dcairns I. 32, and Ifitrod, 
§ 40. Of. 777 b 28, n. 
© See De long. et bree. vit. 466 a.15 ff.,.P.A. 677 a 35 ff. 

476 

— 

‘GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. x. 

Still, this is not the reason for it ; only, this is what 
in fact normaliy occurs. The larger and more per- 
fect of the blooded animals do certainly live a long 
time, but not all the larger ones are also longer-lived. 
Man is the longest-lived of them all. except the 
elephant, so far as we have any reliable experience ; 
but human beings are smaller than the lophouroi * and 
many others. The reason why any animal is long- 
lived really is that its “blend” is about the same in 
comparison’ with the air which is around it,’ and 
there are other contributory factors inherent in its 
nature, which will be mentioned later on.° The 
reason for the various times of gestation is the size 
of the creatures which are generated. It is not 
easy. for any large structure, be it an animal or 
anything else, almost, to reach its perfection in a 
short time. Hence horses and kindred animals, 
though they live a shorter time than men, have 
a longer time of gestation: in horses birth occurs 
at the end of a year, in the others, generally, after 
ten months. And for the same reason it-takes a 
long time in elephants, whose gestation lasts two 
years owing to their excessive size. 

#In all cases, as we should expect, the times of Periods of 
gestation and formation’ and of lifespan aim, ac- pessene 
cording to nature,’ at being measured by “ periods.” by cosmic 
By a “ period ” I mean day and night and month and ?*"'** 

¢ The. following important paragraph is not fully intel- 
ligible without reference to Aristotle’s theory of the universe 
and of movement...A collection of passages from other 
treatises relevant to this will be found in App. A and App. B 
§ 11, which will provide the best commentary on the present 

e. ¢ Or * birth.” 
_? But Nature cannet always succeed in her aim: see 
~ 978 a 5 below. 

477 

’ VARISTOTLE PTAA 
777 b ae sod ala eile Macaca tain 
Héepav Kal viKTa Kai piva Kat evvavrov Kal rods 
20 xpovous Tods peTpovpévovs Tovrots, ert Se Tas THs 
aeAnvyns mepiddous. etal be mreplodar _ceAivn: 
mavaéeAnves Te Kai POicis’ Kal TOV perakd xP vey 
yi Paige “ye it iy rt we y TiS if. 
at dixoTopiau Kara yap TavTas ovpBdAdAe TPS 
TOV mALoV" 6.yap pets Kow?) meptodds éorw. D= 

; ” \ / > *; STEN Pye tty = , 
Tépwv. €or. de 7 ceAjvyn apy? dia THY mpos TOV 
25 HAvov Kowwviay Kal Thy peraAnbw Thy TOO dwrds- 
/ A LA ” ae 9 La x \ 
ywerar yap womep adAdos 7Awos éAdtrwy: 810 
ovpPdArerat eis mdoas Tas yeveoeis Kal TeACLMOELS. 
1) mavoédnvds te Kai dOicis Ps mavoéAqvoi te kal POicas Wilg.* 

* i.e., full moon, new moon, first. quarter and last quart r. 
The meaning of ovpfdde is obscure. The word occur 
twice in Meteor., once (345 b 6) in an astronomical context, 
and once (376 b 24) in connexion with the rainbow, but 
neither passage helps to elucidate the present “at tha the 

must, however, have some reference to the fact t at the 
month is a “ joint period ” of moon and sun na note belo 
so the rendering I have given may’ be offered as atVany 
' rate not inapproprfate. ‘The importance here attached to 
the “ bisections ”. of the times is found again in. Theophr. 
De signis 6, where it is said that times and seasons (¢.9., th 
year, the month, the day) are delimited by their ‘bisections 
(ai Suyoropiar SvopiLovor tas wpas), the bisections of the month 
being the full moons, the eighth days and the fourth days 
(rov pva Exacrov .. . Stxoropodar . . . al re wavoéAnvor kal ai 
oydda Kai ai terpddes, § 8); and changes of weather tend to 
coincide with these divisions (§ 9). ot 4 ge 
> Periodos is really a circuit or cycle. | OLE BG 
* This phrase, which he translates “ the month being a 
period common to both,”’ is excised by Platt on the ground © 
that it gives no sense, and that “a period common to both 
sun and moon would be’ one which contained both the solar 
and lunar periods exactly.”” The phrase is,’ however, in 
Scot; and, as it can be satisfactorily explained in view of 
the context, it must be retained. The explanation is this: 
the month, taken in the sense of a lunation, i.¢., the period 
from one new moon to another, or the time required by the 

478 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. x. 

_ year and the times which are measured by these ; 
also the moon’s “ periods ” which are: full moon and 
waning moon, and. the bisections of the intervening .. 
times,* since these are the points at which it-stands 
ina. definite “aspect’’ with the sun, the month 
-being a joint period ® of both moon and sun.° The 
_ moon is a “principle’’ on account of its associa- 
tion with the sun and its participation in the sun’s 
light, being as it were a second and lesser sun,? and 
therefore is a contributory factor in all processes of 

moon to go through all its phases once, is, literally and 
properly speaking, not a private pone of the moon’s, but, as 
Aristotle Says, a joint period of the moon and sun, since it is 
the moon’s position relative to the sun which determines how 
much of the moon’s disk is illuminated. If the moon were 
self-luminous, there would be no phases, and therefore there 
could be no “ phase-period.”” This is made even more clear 
if we consider that the moon does in fact possess a “* period ” 
ae ge to itself, pertaining to the moon’s own actual motion, 

not to the mere illumination of its surface by another 
body, and it is a period which differs in length from the 
lunation or “ phase-period **—a fact which was probably 
better known to Aristotle than to some moderns. This is 
the period. known. in astronomy as the “* sidereal period,” 
i.¢., the,time taken by the moon to-return again to its same 
apparent position among the stars—not to return into con- 
junction.with the sun. The duration of this period is roughly 
27 days 8 hours, as against an average of 29 days 13 hours 
for the “* phase-period.” Aristotle is therefore quite correct 
in stating that the *‘. month,” by which, as the context clearly 
shows, he means the “ phase-period,” is a joint period of the 
sun and the moon. (I should, perhaps, apologize to astro- 
nomers for the un-astronomical term “* phase-period,” which 
I have used instead of “‘synodie period ’*.in order to 
emphasize. the point that phases are an incidental pheno- 
menon, and not an essential concomitant of a synodic period.) 

4 This statement reappears in Theophr. De vent..17 4 oe 

Ajvn . . . otov doberys Buos €or, and ef. id. De signis temp. 5, 
where the moon is described as “ the sun of the night.” 

479 

7T77b 

178 a 

30 

35 

or 

ARISTOTLE!) AH YARD 

at* yap Bepusrires Kat dees MEXpL oupperpias 
TWOS Toda TOS yevecers, pera be. rabra: Tas 
plopas: TovtTwr 8° exovor TO mépas Kal ris apxijs 
Kal THs tedevtis at ToUTwY Kunjoets TOV aoTpwr. 
dorep yap Kal Addarray Kal méoav OpOpev tiv 
TOV bypayv _piow lorapevny Kal peraBdMovoay 
Kara THY Trav mvevpdrov Kinow Kal ordow, Tov 
& dépa Kat Ta TVEVMATE. KaTa THY 700 JiAlov kat 
THs oedijvns Tepiodov,, oUTW Kal Ta eK rovrwy 
pudpeva. Kal Ta ev TovTols dxodovbeiv dvarykatov- 
Kara Adyov yap axodovbeiv Kai ras tev ducupo- 
Tépwv meptddous tats Tav KUpLOTEpeOV. Bios yap 
Tis, Kal Tvevparos €oTt Kal yéeveois Kat, hoses 
Tis be TOV dorpwv tovrav Trepupopas Tax’ 

erepat TWeES elev dpxai. Bovrerar ev odv 7 ‘bois 
Tos TOUTWY dpibwois apiOpetv Tas yeveoets kal Tas 
mainte we ovk axpiPot b€ dud TE Ti TAS ‘ys 

ai P: «al vulg. 2 savras Ss, 

@. OF. Phys. 246 b 4 Tas pev yap Tod cajaros, cola Sybiet 
kal evegiav, ev kpdoet Kai ouppeTpia Deppav Kat puxpav 
Tibepev ) abtdv mpos ada Tay évTos 7 mpos 76 areprexov (of. 
1717 b 7, and 767 a 30 ff.)- dpotws 8€.'. . Kal ras GAAas dperas 
kai xaxias. The language used in the context of this ° Passage 
is very similar to that of Hth. Nic. Bk. II (dealing with 
doctrine of ‘the mean’), where it is stated that the moral 
dperai also are produced and preserved by 7é ovpperpa 
(1104 a 18), whereas they are destroyed by excess and defect, 
just as the corresponding physical aperai arewin 3 

“ Cf. Meteor. 339 a 21 €ort 8 && avayKns nie nus ofros 
[i.e., 6 mrepi Ti viv KOGLOS, the sublunary world} rats dvw 
popais, Wore macav avrod ad Sivapew KvBepvacbae exeiBev- Sit a 
aore Tay ovpBawdvremv mept avrov Op bev s kai yhv Kal ta ovyyev 
Tovrous ws év dAns eibet TeV yeyvowevan airva xen vopilew, Le 
7o 8 obrws airvov ds. 60ev H Tis Kwhoews apxn Thy Tav del 
kwovupevay aitvaréov Sdvapw. 

480 ; 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. x. 

generation and perfecting. As we know, it is heat 
and cooling in their various manifestations which 
up to a certain due proportion® bring about the 
generation of things, and beyond that point their 
dissolution ; and the limits of these processes, both 
as regards their beginning and their end, are con- 
trolled by the movements of these heavenly bodies.” 
Just as we observe that the sea and whatever is of a 
fluid nature remains settled or is on the move accord- 
ing as the winds are at rest or in motion, while the 
behaviour of the air and the winds in turn depends 
upon the period of the sun and moon,° so too the 
things which grow out of them and are in them are 
bound to follow suit (as it is only reasonable that the 
periods of things of inferior standing should follow 
those which belong to things of higher standing) 
since even the wind has a sort of lifespan¢—a genera- 
tion and a decline. And as for the revolution of 
these heavenly bodies, there may very well be other 
principles which lie behind them.’ Nature’s aim, 
then, is to measure the generations and endings 
of things by the measures of these bodies, but she . 

¢ Cf.738 a 20: the times about new moon (ai tv pnvav 
atvodor) are cold because of the failing of the moon, and for 
the same reason they are stormier than the middle points of 
the month ; a precisely similar statement, using exactly the 
same terminology that Aristotle uses, is found twice in 
Theophr. De ventis 17 and De signis 5: in the latter passage 
the cause given is that the moon’s light “ fails ” (dsoAcizer) 
from the fourth day of the waning moon until the fourth day 
of the new moon, and this apparently is the time covered by 
ai avvedo. tv pnvav. The way in which the sun determines 
the weather is discussed at Meteor. 359 b 26 ff. 

4 Cf. above, 776 b 1, and Plato, Timaeus 91 B, c, where 
the course of a disease is compared with the lifespan of a 
living organism. ® See, e.g., De caelo |, Il. 

R 481 

ARISTOTLE) |! 611) 410 

778 a 
dopioriav Kat dia TO yiveoBau TohAas dpxds, at 
Tas yevéoets Tas Kara vow Kal Tas POopas € €pro- 
dilovoar ToAAdKus alrvat TOV Tapa pvow Cup 
TUTTOVTDV etotv. 

10 Tlept bev odv THIS eowbev Tpopys. Tay Lgov Kal 
Tis Ovpace yeveoews elpyrat, Kal xwpis epi 
EKGdOTOV Kal KoW) TEepl TavTwV. 

a mrept_ dé (re Y) Tay dradopaiv ais (as Z, at Y) babipwoe 7a 
Hopia Tay Coiwy, Kal \oTa TO TOLODTO (rosstinor P) oy, 
mepi Tous avOpeirous addunt PYZ: : ,amplius YZ éoa (ev 

obv Z) éxovor popia ta La mavra Kal TOY evTds Kal TAY €xTOs. 
totum vertit X, et 778 a 10 initium facit libri insequentis.. 

482 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, IV. x. 

cannot bring this about exactly on account of the 
indeterminateness of matter and the existence of a 
plurality of principles which impede the natural pro- 
cesses of generation and dissolution and so are often 
the causes of things occurring contrary to Nature. 

Very well: we have now spoken of the nourish- 
ment of animals within the parent, and of their birth 
and exit into the outer world; and we have dealt 
with each kind separately as well as generally with 
them all.* 

* Some mss. have an addition here, for which see opposite. 

483 

: E 

778a161 Tlepi d€ t&v mabnudrwv ofs Svaddpovar Ta 
popia Tv Cawv Oewpynréov viv. Aéyw 8é Ta 
Towuitrta Trabjpata tav popiwy, olov yAavKdrynra 
oupdtwv Kal pedaviav, kat dwvns o€0rnTa Kal 
20 Bapirynra, Kat xpwparos [7 ow@paros| Kat Tpixydv 
7 mTepav Siadopds.’ tuyydver S€ THv TovwovTwv 
evita ev Odows* brdpyovta Tois yeveow, évia® 3 
Omws etvxev, olov pddior emt trav avOpwmwv 
todro oupBéBynkev. ere 5€ Kata Tas TOV HAKiaY* 
petaBoAds Ta pev maow dpoiws trdpyet Tots 
25 Cawous, Ta 8 drrevavtiws, womep Tept Te hwvas 
Kal TrEpt Tpix@v xpdav: Ta ev yap od moAvodrat 
T™pos TO yipas émdjAws, 6 8 avOpwmos padre 
toiTo mdcaxe TOV GAAwv Cadwv. Kal Ta pev edOdS — 
aKorovbe? yevopevors, Ta 5€ mpoiovons THs HAuKias — 
yiwera Sida Kal ynpackdvrwy. epi de> TovTwv 
30 Kal T@V ToLOUTwWY TavTwY odKETL TOV adTOY TpdTFOV 
Set vouilew elvar tis aitias. doa yap 1 THS pv- 
sews [epya|’ Kow7yj’ pnd tia Tod yévous éExaorou, 

4 

4 

1 7 cwparos secl. Bekker, xpaparos 7 S€pparos coni. Platt ; 
fortasse scribendum xpaparos peraBoAds (alterationem coloris 
x). mox  xal rrepdv SY ; diadopds P, d:adopay vulg. 

2 driyos P. 3 éxa Peck (idem Richards) : évios vulg. 
4 ray HAKidv PZ* : rijs jAckias vulg.: jAKias SY. 
5 8 P. ® om. Z; secl. A.-W. 7 xowa Btf. 

484 

BOOK V 

We must now study the “conditions” in respect I 

of which the parts of animals differ. I mean such 

conditions of the parts as the following: blue and = 

dark colour of the eyes, high and deep @ pitch of the “ 
voice, and differences of colour and of hair or feathers. 
Some of these conditions are found throughout cer- 
tain classes of animals ; some occur irregularly, and 
a striking instance of this is afforded by the human 
species. Further, there are some conditions, accom- 
panying the changes in the times of life, which occur 
in all animals alike, but there are others which are 
divergent in different animals, as, e.g., those which 
have to do with the voice and the colour of the hair : 
thus, some animals do not go noticeably grey towards 
old age, whereas man is affected by this condition 
more than any other animal. Again, some of these 
conditions come on immediately after birth, others 
make themselves noticed as age advances, or in old 

e. When we come to consider these conditions 
and all others like them, we must not suppose that 
_ the same sort of cause is operative as before, for 
there are certain conditions which are not character- 
_ istics belonging to Nature in general, nor peculiarities 
proper to this or that particular class of animal ; and 
whatever the quality of such conditions may be, in 

* See 787 b 1, n. 
485 

abo te 

ay 
ristics). 

778 a 

35 
778 b 

5 

10 

ARISTOTLE 

TovTwy ovfev everd Tov Tovdbrov ovr’ €oTw ovUTE 
yiverar. dpbahwos pev yap evekd Tov, yAavicds 
8° od» evexa Tov, mAny a dy ivov 7 708 yevous TOUTO 
TO mabos. ovte & em eviwv mpos Tov Adyov 
ovvretver Tov Tijs ovoias, aA’ cs e€ dvayKns 
yeyvopevenv ets TY vAnv Kal THY Kujoagav apxny 
dvaxréov Tas airias. Womrep yap erexOn Kat 
dpyas ev Tots T™pwrois Adyors, od dua TO yiyvectat 
EKQOTOV Troudv Th, Sud. Tobro Towv Tu €oTiv, doa 
TETOAY EVA. KL epopeva. epya THs, ddaecds <orw, 
aAAa HaMov Sua TO elvae Towadt yiyverau Towbra 
TH yap obcia 7 yeveots dxcohovbet Kab THS odaias 
evekd eoTw, add’ ovx, airy TH yeveoes. of Ss 
dpxaior pvowoddyou TOUVaVTLOV @nonoar. TOUTOV 
oi atrvov Oru ovx édpwv metous odoas TAS airias, 
dAAd. povov THY THS drys. Kal 7 Ths Kumoews, 
Kal Tavras advopiorws, THs 5é TOO ee Kal TAS 
Tob Tédous dvemioKenres lov. 

"Eort pev obv Exaotov everd Tov, yiverat ° 78 

* 7.@., serves no purpose, is not on account of any Final 
Cause.—In view of the discoveries of modern genetics, 
Aristotle’s clear-cut distinction may be somewhat eading ; 
but it will always remain true that some characteristics are 
more “ trivial’’ than others. Whether the genes control 
individual characters such as the possession of blue eyes 
instead of brown, as well as specific characters such as the 
possession of red feathers instead of black, and phyletic 
characters such as the possession of a liver instead of a hepato- 
pancreas—is still uncertain ; but it is likely that they do. - 

» The logos defines the thing’s essence, see Introd. § 10: 
and cf. below, 778 b 17 roudvde Cov idxerrar dv, and the 
context. 

¢ i.e, the Material Cause and the Motive Cause. Cf. 
Bk. II, init. and Introd. § 6. 

4 See P.A. I. 640 a 10 ff. 

486 

~ GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. t. 

no instance is either its existence or its formation 
“ for the sake of something.’’* Thus, the existence 
and the formation of an eye is “ for the sake of some- 
thing,” but its being blue is not—unless this con- 
dition is a peculiarity proper to the particular class 
of animal. And further, in some cases this condition 
has nothing to do with the logos® of the animal's 
being ; instead of that, we are to assume that these 
things come to be by necessity, and so their causes 
must be referred back to the matter and to the 
source which initiated their movement.¢| Remember 
what was said at the beginning, at the outset of our 
diseussion.? So far as the regular, definite products 
of Nature’s hand are concerned, whatever a thing 
may be as regards its quality, the reason why each 
thing is of such or such a quality is not because 
it gets formed such while it develops ; the truth is 
that things get formed such because they are such,’ 
for of course the process of formation takes its lead 
from the being, and is for the sake of that; the 
being does not take its lead from the process.’ The 
old physiologers, however, thought the opposite, 
because they did not see that the causes were 
numerous ; they recognized only the Material Cause 
and the Motive Cause (and even these they did not 
clearly distinguish), whereas they paid no attention 
to the Formal Cause and the Final Cause) 

Each thing, then, is “ for the sake of something,” ? 

e = Cf- Dante, Paradiso xx. 78, quoted on p. 1. 
ovaia here is no doubt, in the first place, the individual 
ms ss thing which the process is destined to produce (see 
736 b 27, n., mani 767 b 34 ff.); but we may also remember 
the use of ovcia with reference to the essential nature of a 
thing. as in the phase Adyos ris obcias, 1. 35 above. 
2 7.€., on account of some Final Cause. 

487 

778 b 

15 

20 

to 
1 

ARISTOTLE — 

dud. Te TavTHV THY aitiay Kal Sia Tas AouTas SoaTrep 
€v T® Aoyw evuTTdpyet TH Exdotov 7 eoTw Eeverd. 
Tov 7) 00 vera. Ta&v S€ pu) ToLovTwY, Gowv éoTt 
yeveois, On ToUTwWY TO alTLoN ev TH KWHoer det 
Kat TH yeveoe Cyreiv, ws ev abth TH ovoTdcer THY 

Suadopav AapBavdvrwr. dhbadwov pev yap e& 

avayKns €&eu (Tovdvde yap CGov tbroKxerrar dy), 
Tovovoe dé ofbaduov e& dvdyKns pev,, ov Tovavrns 
5’ avdyrns, add’ dddAov Tporov, OTL ToOLovdl 7 
TOLOVOL TroLety TéepUKE Kal TAOXELW. 

Awwpiopevwy dé Tovtwr Acyaper rept TOV 
eget ovpPauvdvrwy. mp@trov pev odv drav 
yévwvrat Ta TaLdia TavTwr, pddora TOV dreA 
TUKTOVT Joov," Kabevdew eclwhe, Sua TO Kal ev TH 
pntpt, Stav AdBn mp@rov aicbnow, Kabevdovra 
duateAciv. exer 8° amopiav rept ths €€ apxns 
yevéoews, mOTEpov eypyyopots brdpxer Tots Cebous 
mpoTepov 7) Umvos. Sia yap TO paiveobar mpotovons 
Ths HAukias eyeipdpeva waAAov, evAoyov TodbvavtTiov 
€v TH apxh Ths yevéeoews brdpyew, Tov Umvov, 
éru d¢ dua TO THY peTrdBaow ek TOD 47) Elvou Eis 

1 corrupt. agnovit Platt: correxi (cf. 779 a 24): dareAdv 
vulg.: et maxime filii qui pariuntur incompleti X. 

@ i.e., the Final Cause. 

> rorovde here= dparuxdv or opbaruov € éxov; to use the termi- 
nology of a few lines above, To anon elvac ev 7® Adyw 
evuTapxet TH TOD Codov. 

¢ And since the animal tadxerrar to be e.9. Oparixor, 
the sort of necessity which requires it to be dpatixdv is neces- 
sity ¢€€ tro8écews (see Introd. § 7), the necessity which is 
implied by the Final Cause. For dzoxe:rar see also 766 b 8. 

488 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

while as regards their process of formation, all those 
characteristics which are contained in its logos, or are 
subservient to some end, or are an end in themselves 
—these come to be formed on account of this Cause @ 
as well as the remaining Causes. Other character- 
istics, however, are formed during the process which 
do not fall under the headings just given, and the 
eause of them is to be looked for in the movement, 
i.e., the process of formation—we must assume that 
they acquire their differences within the actual pro- 
cess of construction. Thus (to take an example) 
X will of necessity possess an eye (because that 
characteristic? is included in the essence of the 
animal as posited),° and it will—also of necessity— 
possess a particular sort of eye, but the latter is a 
different mode of necessity from the former,’ and is 
derived from the fact that it is naturally constituted 
to act and to be acted upon in this or that way.’ 
Having settled these points we may proceed to Sleep. 
those which immediately follow. First then: the 
habit of the young of all animals, especially those of 
animals which bring forth their young imperfect, 
once they have been born, is to sleep, because they 
are in fact continually asleep within the parent from 
the time that they first acquire sensation. There is, 
however, a puzzle concerning their original forma- 
tion, which is this : which state exists first in animals, 
sleep or waking? From the fact that, as we see, 
they become more awake the older they get, it seems 
reasonable to suppose that the opposite state, sleep, 
is the one that exists at the beginning of their forma- 
tion—and also from the fact that the transition from 

* i.¢., the necessity implied by the Motive and Material 
Causes. See Introd. § 7. * Cf. App. B §§ 8 ff. 

489 

778 b 
30 

35 

779 a 

ou 

10 

ARISTOTLE — iva 

To elvae dua Tod peTakd yiveobar: 6 8 dmvos elvar 
doe? TV dvow Tadv Tovovbrw, otov Tod 58 Lay wal 

‘rod pny Civ peBopiov, Kal ovre BN elvan mravTehas 

6 Kabevdwv our’ elvac. TO yap eypnyopevan 70 
Civ pad? bmdpxet dud. Ty atoOnow. el s corlv 
dvayKatoy éxew alaOnow 70 Cov, Kal TOTE mparsy 
cor Lov dorav alabynos yévntar mpa@tov, T7)v pev 
e€ apxis dudbeow ody Umvov aad’ dpoov dave det 
vopilew, olavrep Exer Kal TO THY duT@y yévos* 
Kal yap ovuBéBnKe Kara todrov ‘Tov Xpovov Ta 
{da durod Biov Civ. Tots de purots dmdpxew Umrvov 
advvatov: ovfeis yap Umvos dvéyepros, 70 (8€ Tay 
puTo@v 7d8os 70 dvdAoyov TO omy dvéyeprov, 
Kabevdew HEV oby Ta (da TOV mets xXpovoy. avay- 
Katov dua TO THY avénow Kal TO Bépos emucetobau 
Tois, ave TomoUs (cipnxapev dé TH airiay Tob 
Kabevdew TovatTny odoav ev éré pots)" aad’ Guws 
evyerpopieva paiverat kal ev Th EAT PE (d9Aov" de 
yiverat Toro év tais avatopats Kal €v Tots wo- 
tokovow),* ir’ evbds Kabevdovat Kal karadépovrat 
maAw. Sid7ep Kat e&eAOovta tov modAdv Siayer 
xpovov xafevdovra. 

Kai éypnyopota pev od yeAa 7a Tratdia, Kabed- 
ovra d€ Kai Saxpver Kat yeAd. aupPaivovor yap 
Kat Kkabevdovow aidOnces Tots Cawous, od povoy 

1 > Ed Sf 
WOTOKOULEVOLS L, 

@ Of. De somno et vig. 457 a3 ff. See also P.A. 686 b 2 ff., 
G.A. 741 b 28 ff. 

> See P.A. 653 a 10 ff., De somno et vig. 455 b 28 ff., 
especially 456 b 17 ff. Sleep is caused by the upper 

490 

-- =e 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

not-being to being is effected through the inter- 
mediate state, and sleep would appear to be by its 
nature a state of this sort, being as it were a border- 
land between living and not living : a person who is 
asleep would appear to be neither completely non- 
existent nor completely existent : for of course it is 
to the waking state par excellence that life pertains, 
and that in virtue of sensation. On the other hand, 
assuming it is necessary that an animal should possess 
sensation, and that it is first an animal at the moment 
it has first acquired sensation, we ought to regard its 
original state not as being sleep but something re- 
sembling sleep—the sort of state that plants also are 
in; indeed the fact is that at this stage animals are 
living the life of a plant. Sleep, however, cannot 
possibly pertain to plants, because there is no sleep 
from which there is not an awaking, and there is no 
awaking from the condition in plants which is ana- 
logous to sleep. Anyway, young animals must of 
necessity sleep for the greater part of the time be- 
cause the burden of their growth and the consequent 
weight is laid upon the upper regions of the body.* 
(We have explained elsewhere’ that such is the 
eause of sleep.) All the same, animals are clearly 
found to wake even within the uterus, as is shown 
by dissections and by the case of the Ovipara ; after- 
wards they immediately drop off and fall asleep 
again. That is why after birth as well they spend 
most of their time asleep. 

Infants do not laugh while they are awake, but 
they both laugh and weep while they are asleep, for 
of course sensations occur in animals during sleep as 

regions of the body becoming weighed down by various hot - 
substances which are carried up to them. 

491 

779 a 

15 

20 

25 

30 

ARISTOTLE — 

Ta KaAovpeva € evirvia, GAA Kal Tapa TO evirrviov, 
Kabdmep Tots dvvorapevous Kabevdovor Kal Troha. 
mpatrew dvev Tod evurrud en. etal ydp Twes ot 
ape Pea avioravTat Kat mopevovrat Prérovres 
womep ot eypnyopdtes. TovTois yap yiverar TOV 
ovpBavovtwr aicOnos, otk éypyyopdo. pév, od 
pevrou ws evdrviov. Ta dé maidia eolkacw, womep 
dvemloTnwova Too eypnyopevat, dud ovv7ifevay ev 
T@ KabevdSew aicbavecbar Kat Civ. potsyros dé 
Tod xpdvov, Kal THs adéjoews «is Ta” KdTW pmETA- 
/ > / / ~ ” A \ 
Bawovons, éyelpovrai te padAdov dn, Kat Tov 
TAciw xpdvov otTw Sudtyovow. paddov € Trav 
GArAwy Caowy ev trvw 7d mp@tov SiaTeAovow-: 
ateAdorata yap yevvarat TOV TereAeopevenv, real 
THY avénow €xovTa pdadoTa emi TO dvw pepos 
TOO owpatos. 
/, \ \ »” ~ / 279% 
TDAavkdrepa S€ ta oppata tov tradiwv edOds 
/ 3 > ‘ / MA PS) A rp AA 
yevonevwr® oti mdvtwv, torepov dé petaBdAAer 
mpos THhv d1dpyew péAAovoay dvaw adtois: eri 
d€ TOV GAAwv Cauv ov oupBaiver TOOT emdij dws. 
ToUTOU [LEV OvV aiTLOV TO }ovdxpoa Ta Oupara THY 
dAAwv elvar paddov, olov ot Bdes pedavdgbadnor, 
To d€ t&v mpoBatrwv sdapés mavTwv, Tav de 
4 hud A , nn ,- A > > / 
xXapotrov ddrov 70 yévos 7 yAavKov, ena 8 aiywra, 
Kabamep Kal TO TV alydv adro mwARBos. ta Se 
TOv avOpditwv oppyata moddxpoa ovuPePnkev 

1 of om. PZ. 2 7a PSYZ*; zo Bekker per errorem. > 
3 yevonevwy P: yervwyévwr vulg. 

2 Man produces his young “‘ perfect ’’ (see 770 a 33); the 
492 

——. 

Se 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

well as in waking hours, and this includes not only 
what we call dreams but something more besides ; 
thus persons who get up while they are asleep do 

uite a number of things without dreaming at all. 
There are those who get up while asleep and walk 
about and can see as well as anyone awake. The 
reason is that they are aware through their senses of 
what is going on, and though they are not awake, 
still this awareness is different from that of a dream. 
Infants, it would seem, have not yet acquired the art 
of being awake, if we may put it so, and thus both 
their sensations and their life go on during their sleep 
by force of habit. As time wears on, and the scene 
of their growth shifts its ground to the lower parts 
of the body, at this stage they wake up more and 
spend the greater part of their time awake. To 
begin with, howeyer, infants spend more time asleep 
than any other animal, because they are born in a 
more imperfect condition than any other perfected ¢ 
animal and have made their advance in growth chiefly 
in the upper part of the body. 

The eyes of all infants are bluish immediately after Colour of 
birth ; later on they change over to the colour which "* 
is going to be their natural colour for life. In the 
other animals this does not occur noticeably, and the 
reason is that their eyes exhibit more singleness of 
colour : thus, cattle have dark eyes ; all sheep have 
pallid ® eyes; another class of animal will all have - 
greyish-blue, or blue, eyes; some have. “ goat’s- 
eyes,’ ° as indeed the majority of goats themselves 
have. The eyes of human beings, however, show 

fissipede animals, such as the dog, produce them “ imper- 
fect,” ¢.g., they are born blind. 
> Lit. * watery.” © i.2., yellow. 

| 493 

ARISTOTLE AMke 
779 a 
35 elvau- Kal yap yAavxot Kat _ Xaporrot Kab jichav- 
779 b opbahuoi Ties ciow, ot 8 atywmol. wore Ta pev 
Ma @ aorep! ovo’ aMndev diadépovow, obras ovd” 
aura abray: ov yap TEepuKe mAelous peas pi 
xpoas.” pddvora dé Tav ddAwv Cee ¢ im7mos ToAU- 
Xpwv €or’ Kal yap érepoyhavKot TWES abray 
5 ylwovrat.  Tobro be THY pev dMAwy ovbev mdaxer 
Coowy emdijAws, avOpwrot Sé yivovtai twes éTEpo- 
yAavkot. 
Tod pev odv radda Ca véa dvra Kat mpeopdrepa 
pnbev emidnrov peraBaddAew, emi dé tav mradiov 
ToOTo ovpBaivew, teaviyy olnréov aitiay elvac Kat 
10 TavrnY, ort TOV pev povoxpwv Ta&v be moNdX peov 
TO popiov €or Too d€ yAavKdrepa Kat pa) Xpoav 
GAAny és toxew aitiov ore _dobevéorepa Ta popea TOV 
vewv, aabevera S€ Tis 7) ) yAavKdrns. 
Act de AaBety iaBdrov mepl Tijs Siadopas | Tov 
Ompator, dua Ti airiav Ta pev yAauied, Ta. (be 
15 Xapoma Ta, 8 aiywra Ta be peAavopupar’ eoTiv. 
TO pev ody vroAauPdavew. Ta pev yAavKa mupwdn, 
Kabdmep “EpmedoxdAjs gyot, 7a de péAava mActov 
Udatos € Exel 7 Tupos, Kal Oia TOUTO TA MEV Hmepas 
ovK 0&0 Brerrew, Ta yAavkd, 0 evdevav vdaTos, 
barepa. be vdKTap bu’ evdevav mupos, od A€yerat 
20 KaADs; €lzrep p47) TUpOs THY OY Oeréov aA vdatos 

* dare Ta pev dAAa du6zrep (Gomep Z*) Z%,; aud @atrep Y: 0 
dAAa womep A.-W.: 8&0 kal womep VU 
vd sic Platt, Btf.: arhelos puds taxew xpdas (vel xpoas) PZ: 
mAciw puas ioxew vulg. 

@ 7.¢., they do not vary at different times. Or it may mean, 
“are not odd-coloured.” 
> Lit., “‘ blue in one eye.” 

4.04 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

in practice a multiplicity of colour ; some are blue, 
some greyish-blue, some dark, some yellow.. Hence 
in the case of the other animals, just as the individuals 
of any class do not differ from each other, so they do 
not differ from themselves,* the reason in both cases 
being that they are not naturally constituted to have 
more than one colour. The greatest multiplicity of 
colour, however, among the other animals is found in 
the horse ; indeed in some horses the two eyes are 
of odd colours.’ No other animal is noticeably 
affected in this way, though some human beings are. 

Well, then, for the fact that in the other animals, 
young or old, no noticeable change occurs, whereas 
in infants a change does occur, we must consider 
simply this to be a sufficient cause, viz., that in 
animals this part is single-coloured, in human beings 
multicoloured ; while for the fact that the young 
have bluish eyes and not some other colour, the 
reason is that their parts are weaker than those of 
adults, and blueness is a form of weakness. 

We must now’ determine the general question of 
why eyes differ, and what is the cause why some are 
blue, some greyish-blue, some yellow, some dark. 
There is a theory, stated by Empedocles, that blue 
eyes are fiery in composition, while dark ones contain 
more water than fire, and that therefore blue eyes 
are not keen-sighted in the daytime owing to their 
deficiency of water, and the other ones suffer in the 
same way at night owing to their deficiency of fire. 
But if we ought in point of fact ° to posit that the 
sight,? in all cases, consists of water, not of fire, then 

¢ This is Aristotle’s own theory ; see De anima 425 a4; 
De sensu 438 a 5, 13 ff.,b 5. For details, see App. B § 28. 
@ i.e., the organ of sight, as often in this discussion. 

495 

ARISTOTLE Kipry 

779 b ~ »” Fi om / ; ~ , A ” 
méow. eT. 8 evdéxeTar TOV XpwuadTwv TH atriav 

amodobvat Kal Kat’ aAdov Tpdmov: add’ elzrep eotiv 

womep eéxOn mpdtepov ev Tots mrepl Tas aicOrycets 

Kal ToUTwY ETL TpdTEpov ev Tots Tepl wuyhs Siw- 

propevors, Kal OTe ddaros, Kal du Hv airiav vdaros 

25 GAN’ odK depos 7) Tupos TO atonripioy Toor’ eorl, 

radray aitiav dmohnmréov elvas TOV eipmpevev. ot 

pev yap €xovor TOV opbaAyav aAéov dypov, ot & 

éAarrov Tis oUpperpou KuvoEws, ot de oper por. 

Ta pev obv €xovTa TOV oppdtwv ToAd 7d dbypov 

peAavoupatda e€otr dia TO pr eddiom7’ elvar Ta 

30 7oMd, yAavka dé Ta ddiyor, Kabdaep paiverar Kal 

eri tis Oaddrrns: TO pev yap eddiomTov aurijs 

yAavKov daiverar, to 8’ Hrrov ddarddes, To de pe 

Suwpropevov Sid, BdBos péAav Kat KvavoeidSés. 7a 

dé peragd TOV oupdtwv Tov’Twy TA et a 787 
duadéper Kat iyrrov.. 

35. Tv 8 adrny airiav oinréov Kal Too Ta pev 

yAavKa pi) evar ofvwma THs jpepas, Ta Se 

780a peAavoppiara Ths VUKTOS. Ta pev yap yAavid be 

oduyornTa: TOU dypob KuvetraL paMov bo Tob 

putds Kat TOV oparay, ? dypov Kai 7} Sragaves. 

€o7t 5° 1% TovTov Tod popiov Kivynois dpacis 7 

5 duadaves, add’ ody 7 dypov. Ta dé peAavdmpata 

da 7AH00s Tot bypob Arrov Kweirar. dobeves 

@ See references already given in a previous note, a few 
lines above. 

> The meaning of this will be seen later, ¢.g., 780 a1 ff., 
b 24. See also App. B §§ 26 ff. 

496 

ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

Empedocles’ statement is incorrect. And besides, 
another method is open for explaining the cause of 
the colours. But assuming the correctness of what 
was said earlier in the treatise Of the Senses, and 
before that in the treatise Of the Soul,* i.e., that the 
sense-organ of sight is composed of water, and also 
the correctness of the cause there assigned for its 
being composed of water and not of air or of fire, 
then we should take it that the following is the cause 
responsible for the phenomena just described. Some 
eyes contain too much fluid, some too little, to suit 
the right movement,’ others contain just the right 
amount ; and so those eyes which contain a large 
amount of fluid are dark, because large volumes of 
fluid are not transparent; those which contain a 
small amount are blue. (Sea-water is a parallel 
instance. Transparent sea-water appears blue, the 
less transparent appears pallid, and water so deep 
that its depth is undetermined is dark or dark blue.) 
Eyes intermediate between these two extremes differ 
merely by “ the more and less.”’ ° 
We ought to suppose that to the same cause is due Keenness 

the fact that, blue eyes are not keen-sighted during * ™8"* 
the daytime nor dark eyes at night. Blue eyes, on 
account of the small amount of fluid in them, are 
unduly set in movement by the light and by visible 
objects, in respect both of fluidity and of trans- 
parency. Itis, however, the setting in movement of 
this part in respect of its transparency that consti- 
tutes sight, not in respect of its fluidity. Dark eyes 
are set in movement less owing to the amount of 

© See Introd. § 70. 

4 For the details of Aristotle’s theory of vision, see App. B 
§§ 26 ff. 
4907 

780 a 

ARISTOTLE 

yap TO vuKTepwov das* dpa yap Kal dvoKkivyrov ev 
TH vuKTi dAws yiyvetar 7d tbypdv. det dé ovTE 
p47) Kwetoba abo ovTe pa\Aov 7 Suadaves” €K- 
Kpovet yap 7) loxuporépa Kino Thy aobeveort wobeX. 

10 810 Kal amo TOV toyupa@v Xpoparav PET 

Ves 
Aovres ovx opaot, Kat eK Tob sWrtou eis TO oKOTOS 
idvrTes* ioxupa yap ovoa 1 evuTdpxovoa Kivno.s 
4, A / Vw @# »” / ” 
Kwdver THY Opabev, Kal GAws ote abevovca ovTE 
> \ + \ A 4 c a \ \ 
aoberns ois ta Aapmpa Svvarar opadv dia TO 
‘ : a \ A © 1 , ~ 
mdoxew Tt UGAAov Kal Kweicba TO bypdv. SyAot 

\ \ \ > / a ” ¢ / \ 
15 6€ Kal Ta appwoTHpata Ths owews ExaTépas. TO 

pev yap yAavkwya yiverar uaAdov Tots yAavKois, 
ot dé vuKtdAwmes Kadovpervor Tots weAavodbaApors. 
€ott 5€ TO prev yAatvKwpa Enpodrns Tis [paAAov|? 
Tov oppdrwv, 8d Kal ovpBaiver paddAov* ynpd- 
okovow: Enpaiverat ydp, Womep Kal TO aAAo cpa, 
Kal Tadra Td popia mpds TO yhpas 6 de vuKTdAwis 
bypoTyntTos mAcovacpds, 510 Tots vewrTépois ‘yiveTau 
padrov: byporepos yap. 6 eyKépados 0 TovTwr. 

7 S€ eon Tob moAAob Kal Tod dAiyou bypod BeA-- 

14Z: 7H vulg. 2 secl. A.-W. 
§ yaArov.om. Z. 

* The movement already in progress in the eye is so strong 
that it precludes any fresh movement that comes from out- 
side from making itself felt in the eye. 

» Dark eyes have so much fluid in them that the weakness 
of the light at night cannot set them in movement (780 a 5). 
—Night-blindnéss is also the sense of the word as defined by 

Galen; but the term seems to haye been used in opposite 

senses in ancient times; ¢.g. *» in Hippocrates, Prorrh. 
(ix. 64 Littré) voxrddures = of Tis vuKros dpavres (though one 
Ms. apparently reads ody dparres); and see L. & S. 

¢ But he has said above (779 a 28 and 779 b 11; repeated 
below 780 b 1) that the eyes of new-born infants and young 

498 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

fluid which they contain, for the light is weak during 
the night, and, in addition to that, fluid generally is 
not easily set in movement at night. To obtain the 
best results, it must avoid both (a) not being set in 
movement at all and also (6) being set in movement 
too much in respect of its transparency, because the 
stronger movement ousts the weaker.* That is why 
people who have been looking at strong, brilliant 
colours, or who go out of the sunlight into the dark, 
cannot see: the movement which is already present 
in their eyes is so strong that it precludes the move- 
ment which comes from without. And in general, 
neither strong sight nor weak sight-can see bright 
things because the action undergone by the fluid in 
the eye is unduly intense—+.e., the fluid is set in 
movement unduly. This is borne out by the ailments 
besetting either kind of sight. -Cataract tends to 
attack the blue-eyed more than the dark-eyed, night- 
blindness’? as it is called attacks the latter. , Cataract 
is a sort of dryness of the eyes, and that is why it 
occurs oftener in the ageing, as these parts (the 
eyes), like the rest of the body, become dry towards 
oldage. Night-blindness is superabundance of fluid, 
and that is why it tends to attack younger people : 
their brain is more fluid.© The best sight of all is 
that which is midway between a large amount and a 
children are bluish; and the reason given for blueness at 
780 b.1 (and 779 b 29) is the small amount of fluid. At 
779 b 11, however, the reason given for blueness is weakness 
(weakness is explained at 780 b 7 as being due to lack of 
concoction of the fluid); and at 780 b 8 undue thinness of 
fluid is said to “‘ be equivalent”’ (rv atria exer Svvapyuv) to a 
small amount of fluid. We may deduce, therefore, that a 
large amount of thin fluid is equivalent to a small amount of 

fluid ; at any rate, this seems to be the only way of reconciling 
Aristotle’s apparently contradictory statements. 
499 

ARISTOTLE 
780 a 

/ + ” \ e x\7 > ‘ \ , 
tioTn ous ore yap ws dAlyn odoa Sia TO TAapaT- 

reoae _epmodiles TH TOV Xpwudtwv Kivnow, oUTE 
25 Sua TO" mAiGos TApEXEL Svoxunotay. 

Od pdvov S¢ Ta cipypieva. aitia Tob duBro 7 at. 3&d 
opay, aAAa Kal 4 Tob d€pparos vous Too emt TH 
Kopn, Kaovpery. det yap avro Siadaves elvat, 
ToLodrov om dvayKatov elvat TO Aemrov Kai AevKOV 
Kal dpaArdv, Aemrov pev omws 7 Ovpabev ed0uTroph 

30 Kivyats, opadov & domws pa emoxialy puridov- 
pevov (Kat yap bua Tobd" ot yépovres ovK 0d 
opdow: woTep yap Kal TO do dépua, Kat To Tov 
Oppatros puTiotral te Kal TaxUrepov yiverau 
ynpdoxovow), AcuKov dé Oud TO TO peAav p27) elvan 
diadavés: adto yap tobT’ éort TO péAav, TO [A 

35 Stapaivopevor. Sudmrep ovd” of Aaparhpes Svvavrat 
paivew eav dow eK sTowovrov d€épparos. ai 1 

780 b "Ev pev obv TH ynpa Kal Tals vooors dua Tavras 
Tas aitias ovK ogd BAéovar, ta dé mroudia bv? 
oAvyéTHTA TOO dypod yAavKa paiverat TO mp@rov. 
érepoyhavKor dé yivovrat pddvora oi dvOpwrrou Kal 
of immo. Sia THY abrny airiay du’ jvrep O ev 

5 dvOpwros TroAvodrau povov,, tov & dey inmos . 
povov emdnAws ynpackwy AcuKaiverat Tas Tpixas. 

y] TE yap ToALdT NS dobevera Tis €or Tod vypod Tod | 
ev TO eykepadw Kal amreibia kat 7 yAavKorns: TO 
yap Alav Aerrov 7) 7 Atav max THY avrny exet bv- 

vapw TO pev TO OAlyw TO S€ TH TOAAD vype. 

Ee =” 

1 76 Z*, Aldus; om. vulg. 
2 yovov Aldus, codd.*: pdvos Bekker. 

ee ee 

* And therefore weak-sighted. 
> 4.e., unconcocted. 

500 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1 

small amount of fluid, because: on the one hand it is 
not so small in volume that it gets disturbed and so 
hampers the movement produced by the colours, nor’ 
on the other hand is it so large in volume that its 
movement is rendered difficult. 

These are not the only causes of dullness and keen- 
ness of sight. In addition to them we must mention 
‘the nature of the skin upon what is known as the 
pupil. This skin should be transparent, a condition 
which must of necessity be satisfied by skin that is 
thin, and white, and even—thin, in order that the 
movement that comes from without may take a 
straight course ; even, so that its wrinkles shall not 
produce a shadow (the reason why old people do not 
have keen vision is that the skin in the eyes, like that 
elsewhere, gets wrinkled and thicker in old age) ; 
white, because that which is black is not transparent, 
non-transparency being precisely what blackness is ; 
and that too is why lanterns cannot give any light if 
they are made of black skin. 

In old age and disease, then, these are the causes 
owing to which the sight is not keen; in children, 
however, it is the small volume of fluid which makes 
the eyes appear blue to begin with.* And odd- 
coloured eyes occur more often in human beings and 
horses than other animals for the same cause that 
human beings are the only animals that go grey and 
the horse is the only one of the remainder whose hairs 
noticeably whiten in old age :—Greyness is a weak- 
ness, viz., a lack of concoction, of the fluid in the 
brain ; so is blueness of the eyes ; since unduly thin ® 
fluid and unduly thick fluid are the equivalent © re- 
spectively of a small amount and a large amount of 

© For exe: divaywy, cf. 733 b 15 784 b 14, and Introd. § 26. 
501 

780 b 

; ARISTOTLE 900) 1 
10 orav obv pn Suvyrae dmapricat a) gous dpolws 
7 mrépaca To év dyuporépous vypov 7) p12) Trépaca, 
ada TO pev 7d Se pH, TOTE oupBaiver vyiverGau 

érepoyAatous. 
Tlepi d€ rob Ta jer” dfvwrna elvat TOV Caw Ta 
“8€ pr, do TpoToL THs airias clowv. ix yap 
15 A€yera TO O€d oxedov, Kat Trept TO. akoveww Kat 
TO dadpaiveobar opotws ToT €xeL. A€yerat yap 
ogo opay Ev pev TO _Tmoppabev dvvacbar opav, ev dé 
TO Tas Svagopas OTL pddvora, diatcbdveobar TaV 
Opwpevenv. tabra 5S ody dpa ovpBatver Tots 
avrois. 6 yap adros emmAvyacdpevos" THY xElpa 
20 7) dv’ avhod Baézewy TAS [Lev Svadopas ovfev padAov 
ovo" ATTOV Kpwet® Tay Xpwparev, dyperau d€ mrop- 
porepov. of yoov eK TOV (opyypareny Kal ppedrav 
eviore aorTépas opBow. wor el Tt TOV ldo € exet 
jeev mpoBodny Tob Opparos mroAdiy, ro 8 ey TH 
KOpy) Sypov 7) Kaapov finde avppetpov TH Kujoet 
25 TH Dvpabev, pnde TO emumoAis déppya AewTOv, TOOTO 
mept pev Tas Svadopas ovK dicpiBosoer TOV xpo- 
patwv, toppwbev d eorau Oparucdy (wo7rep et Kal 
eyyvbev)® wadAov t&v TO ev bypov Kabapov éxov- 
TwY Kal TO oKeTACLA avTod, pn exovTwy 8 Emt- 
oKvviov 7pd0 T&V oupdtrwv pnbev. Tod pev yap 
30 ovTus ov pay wore SiarobdvecBar Tas Svagopds, 
év are TO Oppart éorw 7 airia: WoTeEp yap ev 
iuari Kabap@ Kat at puxpat xndjSes evdnAor 

, emMAvyacdpevos P: -yo- vulg. 
* xpwet Peck (idem Sus., Richards): xpivec vulg. 

4 Gomep . . eyybev secl. A, -W., om. &: dowzep YZ pro 
woTrep aa Kal. 

* Chiefly, as will shortly appear, the differences of colour. 
502 

— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1 

fluid ; therefore, whenever Nature cannot make the 
fluid in both eyes tally, either by concocting it or 
by not concocting it in both, but instead of that 
concocts it in one and not in the other, the result is 
odd-coloured eyes. 

The fact that some animals are keen-sighted and Two senses 
others not is due to two sets of causes, for ““ keen ” anes = 
here has practically two meanings (so it has when 
applied to hearing and smelling). Thus, keen sight 
means (a) ability to see from a distance, (6) distin- 
guishing as accurately as possible the differences * of 
the objects which are seen ; and these faculties do 
not oecur together in the same persons. The man 
who shades his eye with his hand or looks through a 
tube will not distinguish any more or any less the 
differences of colours, but he will see further ; at any 
rate, people in pits and wells sometimes see the stars. 
So that if any animal has a considerable projection 
over his eyes, while the fluid in his pupils is not pure 
nor suitably proportionate to the movement coming 
from without, and if the skin on the surface of them 
is not thin, then that animal will not have accuracy of 
vision in so far as differences of colours are concerned, 
but he will be able to see from a distance (just as he 
would from close quarters) better than animals which 
though they have pure fluid in their eyes and a pure 
covering round it, yet have no projecting brow at all 
in front of their eyes. The reason is that (a) the 
cause of being keen-sighted enough to distinguish the 
differences (of colour) lies in the eye itself, since just 
as quite small stains are plain and distinct on a pure, 
clean shirt, so quite small movements are plain and 

503 

ARISTOTLE 

780 b “ 
ylwovra, odtws Kal ev TH Kabapa oper Kal ai 

puxpal Kwjoeis SHAaL Kal tovotow atobnow. Tod 

dé Ta moppwlev Spav Kal Thy amd TOV Tdéppwlev 

35 dpaT@v apuxvetobat Kivnow 9 Géous airia Tay 
odbaduav> Ta pev yap e€dp0aAua ovK edwrd. 

781 a moppuev, 7a 8 evros Exovra Ta Oppara, ev KoiAw 
Keijeva OpatiKa TOv moppaobev dua To THY Kivnow 

HM oxedavvvabas eis dxaves GAN’ etumopeiv.. ovbev 

yap Suageper To Aéyew opay, Somrep TwWes past, 

TO THY ow e€vévan (av yap al] TL mpo TV 

Cupido, SiacKedavvypevny avayKn eAdrre ™poa- 
mintew Tots opwpuevois Kal ArTov Ta TroppwHev 
opav), TO Th amo Ta&v Opwpevov KujoeL opav. 
opoiws yap dvdyen Kal Te oof TH Kw7joee Spay. 
pddvora peev ovv éwparo av Ta 7oppailev, el azo 
Ths oews edOds cuveyts iv mpos TO dpebpevov 
> /, b) ‘ bal /, ¢ Ld c > ‘ 
10 ofov addAds: od yap av duveAvero 7 Kivnows 7 azo 
a, & A > O\ Pe | A. | le s > fs md 
TOv oparOv: ei dé pj, Gowmep av emt mA€ov éexéx7, 
TocovTw axpiBéaTepov Ta TOppwHev Spay avayKn. 
Kat ris pev Tdv oupdrav diadopas eotrwoav 
abrat ai airiar. 
\ . oe \ / »” ‘ ‘ A > A 
Il Tov adrov 5€ tpdmov exer Kat wept THY aKonv 
15 kal THY dodpnow: év pev yap €otTe Tod axpiBas 
> 4 ‘ > /, \ ‘ \ ~ 
akovew Kal oodpaivesbar to Tas Siadopas Tav 
brokeysevwv aicOnrav ott pddiora aicbavecBau 

or 

1 énéyn Platt: dréyn vulg.: én Z. 

@ 7,¢., the substance of the eye. 

> This theory is put forward by Timaeus in Plato, Timaeus 
45s ff. A similar theory seems to have been held by Em- 
pedocles. 

504 

on 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1-n. 

distinct in a pure, clean sight * and they give rise to 
sense-perception. As for (6) the ability to see things 
at a distance, and the fact that the movement coming 
from objects at a distance succeeds in reaching into 
the eyes, the cause of this is the position of the eyes. 
Animals with prominent eyes do not see well from 
a distance, but those with sunken eyes placed in a 
hollowed recess are able to see things at a distance, 
because the movement does not get scattered into 
space but follows a straight course. It makes no 
difference to this which of the two theories of sight 
we adopt. Thus, if we say, as some people do, 
that seeing is effected “ by the sight issuing forth,”? 
then on this theory, unless there is something pro- 
jecting in front of the eyes, the “sight”’ of necessity 
gets scattered and so less of it strikes the object, 
with the result that distant objects are less well seen. 
If we say that seeing is effected “ by a movement 
derived from the visible object,’’ then on this theory, 
the clarity with which the sight sees will of necessity 
vary directly as the clarity of the movement: dis- 
tant objects would be ‘seen best of all if there were a 
sort of continuous tube extending straight from the 
sight to that which is seen, for then the movement 
which proceeds from the visible objects would not 
get dissipated ; failing that, the further the tube 
extends, the greater is bound to be the accuracy 
with which distant objects are seen. 

These, then, shall be the causes which we assign to 
explain the different sorts of eyes. 

The same situation is found in connexion. with II 
two other senses—hearing and smell—as with sight. Keenness of 
To hear and to smell “ accurately ’’ means (a) to Hearing. 
perceive as well as possible all the differences in the 

505 

ARISTOTLE EASED > 

781 a / a \ ‘ /, ‘ > Ps 9 ‘ 5 
macas, €v de TO moppubev Kal aKovew Kal do- 
ppaiverbar. Too jev oby Tas dwadopas Kpivew 
Kars TO aioPnrnprov altwov, worrep emt Tis 
20 oyews, av i] xabapov avTo TE Kal 7 mept avTo 
pieyé. ‘Lot yap TOpou Tov alcOnrnpiwv mdvTev, 
domep elpnra ev Tots Trepl aicOjicews, Tetvovat 
mpos THY Kapotav, Tots dé pa) exovar Kapotav mpos 
TO avadoyov. O° puev ovv Ths dicorjs, émret €oTt TO 
atobyri prov aépos, q TO mvebpa TO ovppuroy 
25 Toveirau eviois ev TIHV opuew Tots be nv dva- 
TVvOnV [Kat etomvony |, * raurn mepaiver’ - 81d Kal 3 
pdOnous yiverau TOV _Aevyopevev aor avribbéy- 
yeo0ar TO axovobév: oia yap 7 Kivnots <ianAGe dua 
Tod aicOynrypiov, rovadtn mdAw, olov amo xapa- 
KTHpos Too avtod Kad évos, dua THS Pwvhs yiverau 
30 9) Komors, aot 6 akovde, TOOT’ eEizeiv. kal 
Xaopdpevor Kat eKTVEOVTES® TTOV dcovovow i 
elomveovres’ dua. TO él TA TVEVPATUKG jLopte THY 
apxnv’ Tod aisOyrnptov elvar tod TAs aKojs, Kat 
celeoOar Kat Kweicbar dua KiwobvTos Tod opydvov 

1 sequitur (781 a 21—b 6) locus corruptus et sine dubio ex- 

traneus. vide pp. 563 sq. 
6 Aldus, vulg. : 314 PSYZ*. 

3 Kai etamvojv om. Z, Platt: cai eionvony re S: Kat elomvoip 
kai Y. 

* haec sensu carere monet Platt : fortasse seribere malles 
9} 70 mvebpa To ovpdurov mrovet év Tots rcBious ld opus, ravry 
Tepaiver: TO yap mebpa 73 ovpdurov moved ev pev 7 
Ty avarvory, opoiws 8 &v rots woiv THY axon. vertit © 6 pev 
obv Tis axons KrA. et instrumentum sensus auditus est plenum 
spiritu naturali, quoniam spiritus naturalis facit in venis 
motum pulsatilem, et facit in instrumento hanelitus, et 
similiter  Sacit in aure virtutem auditus. 

5 Kai exmvéovres om. &. 8 7 elomvéovres om. &. 

7 reAeurv SY, Aldus. 
506 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. u. 

objects perceived, (b) to hear and smell from a dis- 
tance. As for (a). the ability to distinguish the 
differences. well, the cause of this is the sense-organ, 
just as it is in the case of sight, 7.e., it must be pure 
and clean itself, and so must the membrane round it.* 
[° For the passages of all the sense-organs, as is stated 
in the treatise Of Sensation, run to the heart, or to 
the counterpart of it in animals which have no heart. 
Now the passage of the hearing, since the sense- 
organ of hearing consists of air, terminates at the 
point where the connate pneuma causes in some the 
pulsation, in others, the respiration [and inspiration]. 
This, too, is why we are able to understand what is 
said and to repeat what we have heard, for whatever 
the character of the moyement was which entered 
through the sense-organ, the character of the moye-~ 
ment caused by means of the voice is the same in 
its turn—they might be two impressions from one 
and the same die. - So, if you haye heard a thing, 
you can utter it. Again, people hear less well while 
yawning and breathing out than they do while 
breathing in. The reason is that the principle of 
the sense-organ of hearing is situated upon the part © 
that is concerned with the pneuma, and it is shaken 
and set in movement when the organ sets the 
pneuma in movement [since the organ gets set in 

* Cf. De anima II. 420 a 13: we can no longer hear if the 
membrane is damaged which encloses the air in the ear, 
gh more than we can see if the skin on the pupil of the eye 
is damaged. 

» For the difficulties involved in the following lines, see 
note, pp. 563 f. For the theories here assumed, see the 
account of Xvuduror Ilvedua, App. B, especially §§ 26 ff. 

: © Viz., the heart; see App. B §§ 31 f., and 776 b 17, 787 

28. ‘ f 

507 

781a 

781 b 

ARISTOTLE 

70 med pia [Kevetrae yap Kuwobv To dpyavov.|' Kat 
ev rats bypais cpaus Kat Kpdceow ovpBaiver’ 

35 TO avro mabos,* Kal Ta dra mnpoboba Soke? 

TVEdLATOS dua TO yeurveay | Thy dipxny TQ TMvev- 
patiK® Tom." a) peev oby Tepl Tas Svadopas 
dxpiBeva Tijs Kpioews Kal TOv podwv Kal Tov 
dopey €v T@ TO aicOnrnpiov kabapov elvat Kat TOV 
Seva Tov emutodfs or’ Taoa. yap a Kujoets 

5 Suddn row, Kkabdamep €mt Tihs oipews, Kal em Tav 

TOLOUTWY ovpBatvovow.] Kal TO Toppwbev de al- 
Odveoba [ra d€ p21) aicbdvecbac)? 6 dpoiws ovpBaiver 
womep emi TAs opews. Ta. yap eXOvTa. 77po Tov 
aicOnrnpiwv emi 7oAd ofov dyeTods dua TOV popiwy, 

~ / > / > \ Ad ¢ 
Tatra méppwhev aicbyrixd €orw. 810 Gowv ot 

10 LuKTHpes pakpol, olov Trav Aakwuikav Kkvvidior, 
| dodpartika: avw yap dvtos Tob aicOyrnpiov at 

moppwbev Kuyjoets® od Suaoma@vrat adr’ evBur0- 
podow, @omep Tots emmAvyalopevous" 7po Tov 
oppatwv. odpoiws dé Kal daots Ta. Ora paKpa kat 
dmoyeyercowpeva. Toppaber, ola € exovow eva TOV 

15 TeTpamodwy, Kal €ow THY €EAiKHY paxpav: Kal yap 

TavTa €K mohob AapBdavovra THY Kiyo amro- 
didwot mpos TO aicOyrrpiov. 
Tr pev odv méppwlev axpiBevay TOv aicbjoewv 

1 seclusi: om. =. 

2 rod odparos addit Z (corporis post douav b 3 addit X), 

3 lacunam statuit Platt. y 

4 sic Platt: 77 apy rod mvevpatixod témov vulg.: & vertit 
et implentur aures secundum quod opilatur spiritus propter 
principium instrumenti in quo est |spiritus|. 

5 aut haec secludenda (om. Z), aut (docente Platt) a 
d€ (7a peév) aicbdvecOau scribendum. 

5 ab in. x. Platt: a. ai x. vulg. 

7? énndvyalopevas P: -yC- vulg. 

508 . 

ae 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. nu. 

“movement while it is causing movement]. The 
same condition occurs during damp seasons and 
in damp climates,? and the ears appear to get filled 
with pneuma, because the principle is situated close 
by the region that is concerned with the pneuma. 
Thus, accuracy in distinguishing the differences both 
of sounds and smells depends upon the purity of the 
sense-organ and of the membrane upon its surface, 
for all the movements turn out plain and distinct in 
such eases also, just as in the ease of sight.] (6) Per- 
ception from a distance, too, [and failure to perceive 
from a distance] occurs in the same way.as in the case 
of sight. Thus, animals which have as it were 
channels passing through the parts concerned and 
projecting well out in front of the sense-organs can 
perceive from a distance ; and that is why animals 
which have long nostrils, like the Laconian hounds,? 
are keen-scented: the sense-organ is set well back’ 
in the interior, and therefore the movements which 
come from a distance do not get scattered but take a 
straight course, which is just what happens when we 
shade our eyes with the hand. Another similar case 
is that of those animals which have ears that are long 
and jut well out like the cornice of a house ‘“—some 
quadrupeds have ears of this sort—and a long internal 
spiral passage ; these long ears, like the long noses, 
catch. the movement a long way off and transmit it 
to the sense-organ. 

Accuracy of perception by the senses when exer- 

* Lit., “ blends”; ef. 767 a 31, 777 b 7. 
> There is a long passage about Laconian hounds in 
H.A. 574 a 16 ff. © Cf. P.A. 658 b 16. 

509 

ARISTOTLE ttd 

781 b o eg eta to ¥ ‘ ee 
jKtoTa Gs etrety dvO perros exet ws Kara peyeBos 

tov Cow, riv' dé mepl Tas Siapopas padvora 

20 mavTwv evaicbnrov. aitiov 8 ott TO aiaOnrijpiov 
Kaapov Kal yKLoTAO yeades Kal cuparades, Kal 
pvoeu Aerrrodepporaroy Tov Cawy ws Kara peyebos 
avOpwrds €orw. 

Edhdyus S dmeipyacrau u] pvous Kal Ta mepl 
Thy dwKynv TeTpdmovv yap dv Kal CwordKov odx 
éyes @ra adda wdpous pidvov. altvov 8 Gru ev 

25 byp@ atth 6 Bios: ro Sé€ TaV wrwv pdpiov 
mpockettar Tois mdpois mpos TO awlew THY TOD 
mroppublev depos Kiqoty: ovbev odv XPHoyov éoTw 
abti, adda Kai todbvavriov amepydloir” dv, dexo- 
preva eis atta vypod mrAjOos. 

Kai zepi pev dyews Kal axofs Kal SPP nei 
<ipnrae. 

11130 Ta de TPLXwpara. Siapepovar Kal mpos abdra, Tots 
avOpumrois Kara Tas HAuKias Kal Tpos TA yevn TOV 
dAr\wy Caw, doamep exer Tpixas adrav., €xer O° 
doamep evros att@v Cworokel mavra oyeddv: Kat 
yap Ta axavOddes exovra TH TovodTwy TpLYOV 

35 eldds tu broAnmréov, ofov tds Te THY yYepoaiwy 

1820 exivwv Kai ef tt GAAo TowodTov eat. TaV CwordKwv. 

elat d€ diadopat tav tpiy@v Kata Te oKAnpoTyTa 

Kat padakdrnra, Kal KaTa pAKos Kal Bpaxydrynra, 

Kal ev0UrnTa Kat ovAdrnta, Kal m7ARGos Kali od- 

1 ra PSY. 

@ See App. B §§ 27 ff. 
510 

et te ee on 

oO 

— 

aa 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. m-1n. 

_ cised at a distance is possessed by man to a lesser 
_ degree, in proportion to his size, than almost any. 
_ other animal; on the other hand, he is better than 
any of them at accurately perceiving the differences 
__ in the objects perceived. ‘The reason is that in man 
: the _sense-organ is pure and least earthy and cor- 
_ poreal, and besides that, nature has given him, for 
| his size, the thinnest skin that any animal has. 
Nature has brought off a clever piece of work in the 
seal, too, which, although it is a viviparous quad- 
ruped, possesses no.ears but passages merely. The 
reason is that it spends its life in & fluid medium. 
The ear is a part of the body which is an addition. 
made to the passages in order to safeguard the move- 
ment of the air* which comes from a distance, and 
therefore it is no use to the seal; indeed it would 
actually be a hindrance rather than a help, because 
it would act as a receptacle for a large volume of 
water. 
This concludes our remarks about sight, hearing 
and smell. 
_ The various kinds of growths of hair.—In human III 
beings these differ in the same individuals at different Vstieties 
periods of life, and they differ also in comparison ; 
with the other animals that have hair. Practically 
all the animals which are internally viviparous have 
hair ; I say “all,” because the spines which some 
of them have on the body must be considered as 
being a kind of hair, e.g., the spines of the hedge- 
hog ® and any other such viviparous creature. Hair 
exhibits the following differences : it may be hard or 
soft, long or short, straight or curly, plentiful or 

® Gk. “ land-echinus,”* to distinguish it from the “ sea- 
echinus ” or sea-urchin. 

511 

782 a 

ARISTOTLE 

/ , 
yornta, mpos dé tovros Kat Kata’ tas ypdas, 

5 Kata te” AevKdtyTa Kal pedaviavy Kal ras peratd 

10 

20 

bo 
or 

rovtwv. eviats® Sé tottTwv Tav Siadopav Kat 
kata Tas HAukias dvapépovar véa Te Kat mradaov= 
/ \ a > > U ee: ~ > s 
peva. pddvora 8€ Tobr’ éemtdnAov emi tav avOpw- 
Twv' Kat yap Sactverar paddov mpecBvrepa 
yeyvopeva, kal dadakpodvrat TAS Kepadns evo. Ta 
mpocbev. Kal aides pev dvtes od ylyvovrat 
7“ r a SA 4 
padaxpot, 038° ai yuvaikes: of 8 avdpes mpotovons 
709 THs AAcKias. “Kal modobyrar de tas Kepadas 
yynpdcKovtes of avOpwra. tav 8 dddAwy Cawv 
> A af? ¢ > an , > tA / 
ovfevi Tod0” ws eimeiv. yiverar éemidnrov, pddvora 

8 innw trav dw. Kai dadaxpodvrar perv ot 

~ “~ : ‘ \ 
avOpwro. Ta eumpoober tis Kepadfs, modvol dé 
~ ~ > 
mp@Tov yivovrar tods Kpotdpouvs: dadakpodrar 8 
ovdeis ovte TovTous ovTe TA Omria0EV THs KEepadfs. 
bid ‘ ~ 4 A ” / > ‘ A > 4 
dca dé TOV Caw ph exer tpiyas aAAa TO avadoyov 
abrais, olov dpvifes ev mrepad, TO S€ Tv ixOdwv 
yeévos Aerridas, Kal TovUTOLs oupBaiver THY ToLOvTwY 
TaQnudtwy évia Kata Tov avrov Adyov. 
~ col ¢ 5 ERs 
Tivos pev obv evexa TO TV TpiyOv 7H dvots 
a ” > - 
erroinae yévos Tois Cwous, elpytat mpoTepov ev Tals 
a ~ F > 
aitliaus tTais mept Ta péepn TOV Caw: Ttivwy 8 
7 / 
dmapyovTwy Kai dua Tivas avayKas ovpPaiver 
TovTwy exacTov, SnAdca Tis peodov THs viv 
€orTlv. 
, \ a \ , oie Ss 4 
Ilayvrnros pev obv Kal AemTOTHTOS aiTLov EoTt 
A a A / 
pdAwora To S€py.a: Tots pev yap maxd Tots dé AeTTOv, 
A = > wv \ 
Kal Tots pev pavov Tots dé muKvov éotw. eri de 
1 xat kata P: nat S: Kara vulg. 2 +e PZ, om. vulg. 
5 évias P et corr. Z: éevias vulg. 
* €or. PZ*: om. vulg. 

512 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

scanty ; beside this, it also shows differences of 
colour : it may be white or black or any shade be- 
tween these two. Some of these differences are also 
_ exhibited by the hair according to the various times 
of life, youth and more advanced age. This is 
noticeable chiefly in the case of human beings. Thus 
the hair gets shaggier as age advances, and some 
people go bald in front. Children do not go bald, 
nor do women ; men do, however, when they begin 
to get on in years. In human beings, the hair on 
the head turns white as age approaches ; in other 
animals, however, this does not noticeably occur : 
the horse is the one which shows it-most. Human 
beings go bald on the front of the head, but they go 
grey first on the temples; none however goes bald 
either here or at the back of the head. As for those 
animals which have no hair but the counterpart of 
hair instead (thus, birds have feathers, and the fish 
tribe have scales)—in them some conditions of the 
kind described occur in a corresponding way. 

We have already stated in the treatise on the 
Causes of the Parts of Animals * the purpose for the 
sake of which Nature has made hair in general and 
provided animals withit. The business of our present 
investigation is to show what are the pre-existing 
circumstances, what are the factors of necessity, on 
account of which the particular sorts of hair occur. 

The chief cause, then, of its thickness and thinness 
is the skin ; which in some animals is thick, in others 
thin ; looseknit in some, compact in others. A con- 

* P.A. 658 a 18; viz., for the sake of shelter and protec- 
tion. 
s 513 

782 a 

782 b 

ARISTOTLE me 

/ \ > > 4 € , ¢ 4 
cuvaitiov Kal Tihs evotons bypornros 7 Svapopa- 
a \ ‘ ¢ 4, ae: aA > ec 4 
Tois plev yap wrdpye. Avrapa Tois 5’ ddaTwdys. 
OAws prev yap 1% Tod dSépuaros dvois broKevraL 

30 yewdns* emumoAjs yap ovoa e€atpilovtros tod 

€ ~ \ / ‘ A ¢ \ Ld ‘ 
bypod oreped yiverar kal yewdns, ai d€ Tpiyes Kat 
TO avdAoyov avrais odK eK THs capKos yivovTat 
> a> ~ / > / \ 3 
GAN €x tod Sépparos [eEatpiloytos Kai avabupuw- 
a ~ “A \ a \ > 
févov év avtois Tod vypod. 10 mayeiar pev eK 
Tob maxéos, Aemtal Sé° ex tod Aexrot Séppatos 

, 2 ” \ > \ , , \ 
35 ylvovrat|.” av pev obv 7 TO Sépua pavorepoy Kat 

tA ~ / A ~ ~ / 
TaxUTEpov, TaxEeias Sud TE TO TARVOS TOD yewdous 
Kal dia TO péyeBos TOv. mépwv eiaiv: av se 
muKvorepov, AerTal dua THY GTEvOTHTA THY TOPwV. 
” > bal > c > \ e / ‘ > 
ert 8 dv 7 7 tkpas ddaTwdns, Tayd avaEnpawo- 
/ 3 4 / c / i 
pévns od AapBavovor péyeBos ai tpixes, av de 

4, ? / e) \ > , \ / 
5 Aurapa, Tobvavriov: od} yap ed&jpavrov To Autrapov. 

did7ep OAws pev Ta TaxvdepudTrepa TayuTpLYw- 
tepa TOV Cawv, od pévro. Ta pdAvota pGAdov, 
Sua Tas elpnuevas aitias, olov To Tv bav yévos 
mpos TO TOV Body mémovbe Kai mpos eAddavra Kat 
13 X A ” \ \ > \ > gtry 
mpos* ToAAa Tv dAAwv. dia THY adriy 8 airiav 

10 Kal at ev TH Kehadh Tpixes Tots avOpwrots maxv- 

Tata: TOO yap Sépyaros Toro maxvratov Kal emt 
mAreloTn vypornte, ere 8 Eyer pavdtnta mroAAjv. 
aitiov d€ Kal Tod paxpas [7n Bpaxelas|’ ras tpixas 
elvat TO pr) evEHpavTov elvar TO eEatpilov dypov. 
rob dé put) <d&Hpavtov elvar bV° airiar, TO TE TOGO 

1 x Tod mraxéos, Aerrai 5¢ om. SZ. 2 secl. Platt. 
3 apos PZ*: om. vulg. 4 éi Z: ev vulg. 

5 seclusi; om. >. 

514 

~ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. m1. 

tributory cause is the difference of the fluid present 
in it: in some this is greasy, in others watery. In 
general, of course, the fundamental nature of the 
skin is earthy in substance : being on the surface of 
the body it becomes solid and earthy as the fluid 
evaporates off. Now the hair and its counterparts © 
are formed not out of the flesh but out of the skin [as 
the fluid in them evaporates and exhales ; thus thick 
hair is formed out of thick skin and thin hair out of 
thin skin]}.* If, then, the skin tends to be looseknit 
and thick, the hair is thick both on account of the 
large amount of earthy matter and on account of the 
size of the passages; but if the skin tends to be 
compact, the hair is thin on account of the narrowness 
of the passages. Further, if the moisture is watery, 
it quickly dries off and the hair does not attain to any 
size, though it does if the moisture is greasy, because 
greasy matter does not readily dry off. Thus, gener- 
ally speaking, thick-skinned animals have thick hair? ; 
but it is not true that the thickest-skinned have 
thicker hair than (the others in the same category), 
for the causes mentioned, an example being afforded 
by the pig tribe when compared with that of oxen, 
or with the elephant and many other animals. For 
the same cause, too, our hair is thickest on the head : 
the skin there is thickest and situated over the largest 
amount of fluid,’ and besides that it is very loosely 
knit. And the reason why the hair is long [or short] 
is that the fluid which evaporates is not easily dried 
off. There are two causes which prevent it being 
easily dried off: one is its quantity, the other its 

* These words are deleted by Platt as partly unintelligible 
and as not fitting in with what follows. 
® But see 783 a 2. © Viz., the brain. 
515 

782 b 

ARISTOTLE 

15 Kal TO qroLov" av Te yap mod i] TO by pov, obK 
evénpavTov, wal av Aurapov. Kai dua tobTo Tots 
dvOpedrots at eK Tijs kepadjjs Tpixes paKporaras 
6 yap eyKepados bypos Kat ibvypos @v mroAAjv 
trapéxer Saryirevav Tob bypod. 

Evddrpiya d€ Kal ovAdrpixa yiverat dud. TIV ev 

20 Tats Opibty dvabupiacw. av pev yap 7} Kamvosdns, 
Deppn ovcoa Kal Enpa. ovAnv THv Tpixa Tovet. 

KaPMTET OL yap Sia To do péepeoban popds: TO 
pev yap yeades KatTw, TO d€ Oepuov avw ge- 
peTau. eV dpTTOU 8 ovons’ dv dobéverav oTpe- 
perau ToOTO 8’ éorlv ovdAdrns Tpixos. evdexeTau 
pev ovv ovTw Aafeiv tiv airiav, evddyerar dé Kai 

25 Sua TO dAlyov €xew TO bypdv, odd bé TO ye@des, 
t7o Tod mepiexovtos Enpawopéevas ovordobat. 
Kdpnrerar yap To €v0¥, éav e€atpilnra, Kal 
auvTpéexet worTrep emt Tod updos Kaopevn Opié,” 
ws ovons THs obAdTyTos ovoTdcews bv Evderav 
bypobd bro THs Tod mEpiexovtos OYeppdrntos. oan- 

30 petov & ore Kal oxAnporepar ai ovAa tpiyes TOV 
evbevéav eioiv: TO yap Enpov oxAnpov. ev0vrpiya 
d€ dca bypornt Exel mohAny: peov yap aN’ ob 
aralov TpoepxeTat ev TavTaIs TO Dypov. Kal dud 
TobTO ot pev €v TO Tlovrw LKvdar Kal Opaxes 
ev0Urpixes’ Kal yap avdTol vypol Kal 6 TeEptexwv 

1 ovens Peck : dvros vulg. 
2 Opié PZ, A.-W.: 7 Opié vulg. 

2 For this and other subjects dealt with in Book V, see 
H. Diller, Wanderarzt und Aitiologe, pp. 115 ff., cf. 50 ff. 
et passim. 

* According to Aristotle, there were two sorts of “ ex- 

516 

— 

————_ 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. m1. 

quality. Thus, if there is a great deal of the fluid, 
and also if it is greasy, it does not easily dry off. 
And that is why the hair on our heads is the longest : 
the brain, being fluid and cold, provides fluid in large 
abundance. 

Straight hair and curly hair? is due to the exhala- 
tion in it: if this exhalation is smoky,” being hot 
and dry it makes the hair curly; for the hair gets 
bent because it is subjected to the impulse of two 
directional motions—the earthy constituent urges 
its way downwards, the hot constituent upwards ; 
and as the hair will easily bend on account of its 
weakness, it gets twisted ; that is what curliness of 
the hair really is. Well, that is one cause that may 
be assigned for it: here is another. It may equally 
well be that, owing to its containing but little fluid 
as against a great deal of earthy matter, the hair gets 
dried by its environment and so contracts. Any- 
thing that is straight bends if its vapour is drawn off, 
and shrinks up like a hair burning on the fire, which 
would imply that the curliness of hair is a contraction 
due to lack of fluid caused by the heat of its environ- 
ment. In favour of this is the fact that curly hair is 
also harder than straight hair, and of course anything 
dry is hard. Animals that contain a great deal of 
fluid have straight hair, because in their hair the 
fluid advances in a continuous stream and not drop 
by drop. That is why the Scythians by the Black 
Sea and the Thracians have straight hair : both their 

constitution and the environing air are fluid (moist). 

halation”: the “smoky,” a compound of Air and Earth, 
which is hot and dry; and the “aqueous,” which is cold 
and moist. For further details see De sensu 443 a 21 ff., 
Meteor. 360 a 22 ff., cf. G.A. 784 b 10. 

/ 517 

782 b 
783 a 

ARISTOTLE 

35 a’Trods anp vypos: Aibiores d€ Kal of ev Tots 

Depots ovAdrpixes: Enpot yap ot éyKképador Kat 
6 anp 6 TepLexony 

"Eort 8° eva tav Tayvdeppwv AerTOTpLya S.a 
Tiv eipnuevnv aitiav mpoTepov: Gow yap av AeTTO- 
TEpPOL OL TOpaL Wa, TodO’TW AemTOTEpas avayKatov 

5 yweoOar Tas Ttpixas. 810 TO THY TpoPdtwy yevos 

TovavTas €xe Tas Tpixas TO yap Epiov Tpiy@v 
ag’ bd a > at , “a \ 
TAHV6s €otw. EoTt 8 Era Tdv Cow & padaKyy 
pev exer THY Tpixa, HrTov dé AerTHv, olov TO TOV 
SacuTddwv mpos TO THY mpoBdtwr témovbev. TaV 
yap Towovtwy emimoAns 7) OptE rod Sépyatos. S10 

10 ujKos odK loxer, GAAd ovpBaiver maparrAjovov wo- 

1. Pk PS Wes Wy 2 , \ \ a 
mep TA amo THY’ Aivwr* Evdpeva Kal yap Tadra. 
pnKos pev ov0ev tayer, padakda 8 €ori Kat ov 
déyerar wAoKHY. Ta 8° ev Tots puxpois mpdéBara 
tobvavtiov mémovle Tois avOpdéois- ot pev yap 
XKvOar padrakdrpiyes, TA 5é mpoPata Ta Lavpo- 

15 parucd oKAnporpixe. toutov 8 aituov TavTo Kal 

él TaV dy pic mavTwv. % yap ibuxporns oKAn- 
puver dua TO Enpaivew mnyvvovoa: exOABomevov yap 
700 Oepnod ovveEatpiler TO bypov, Kal yivovTat Kat 
ai tpiyes Kal To S€pya yeddes Kal oxAnpdv. airvov 
Sé Tois pev aypios 7) BupavdAia, Tots 8 6 Tdémos 

lot ” ~ \ \ \ > 3% ~ / 
20 ToLtodTos wv. anpelov dé Kal TO El THY TOVTLWY 

exivwv ovpBatvov, ois xp@vrar mpos Tas aTpay- 
youpias. Kal yap ovTo. dua TO ev yuypaG elvat 
“a / \ \ / > ¢ / \ \ 
Th Oadrdrrn dia To Babos (kal éEjKovTa yap Kat 

1 -@v PSYZ*: om. Bekker per errorem. 
2 wv fortasse scrib. monet Platt, 

518 * 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. m1. 

On the other hand, Ethiopians and people who live 
in hot regions have curly hair, because both their 
brain and the environing air are dry. 
Some, however, of the thick-skinned animals have 
- fine hair owing to the cause previously mentioned ¢ : 
the finer the passages are, the finer of necessity must 
the hairs be. That is why all sheep have fine hair, 
wool being just a very large number of hairs. There 
are some animals whose hair is soft, yet not so fine ; 
this is true of hares, for instance, in comparison with 
sheep. In such animals the hair is on the surface of 
the skin ; and so it is not long, but turns out to be 
very much on a par with the scrapings that come off 
linen cloth, which have no length worth mentioning, 
but are soft and cannot be used for weaving. In cold 
climates sheep and human beings exhibit opposite 
“ conditions *’ from each other: thus the Scythians 
have soft hair, but Sarmatian ® sheep have hard hair, 
the reason for which is the same as it is in all wild 
animals. The cold congeals them and so dries them, 
and this makes them hard: in other words, the fluid 
evaporates at the same time as the heat is expelled, 
and both hair and skin become earthy and hard. Thus 
with wild animals the reason is that they live in the 
open air ; but in other cases it is the nature of their 
situation which is responsible. This is shown by 
what occurs in the case of the sea-urchins which are 
used as a remedy for cases of strangury. These 
creatures, although small in themselves, have long, 
hard spines, because the seawater they live in is cold 
on account of its being so deep (60 fathoms or even 

* See 782 b 1. 
> Sarmatia is the territory between the Vistula and the 
Don, part of modern Poland and Russia: 

519 

783 a 

25 

30 

or 

ARISTOTLE 

ere mAcidvwv ylyvovtTat opyviay), avrot pev juuKpot, 
tas de axdvbas peydAas exovar Kal oxAnpds, 
peydAdas pev dia TO evrabdOa TV Tod osparos 
retpapbat avéynow (dAvydbeppou yap ovtTes Kal ov 
TETTOVTES TV Tpopiy TOAD TepiTTwOpa exovow, ai 
o axavOar Kai at tpiyes Kat Ta Towabra yivovrat 
ek TMEPLTTUPLATOS) o«Anpas be Kal AcABapevas 
Sud. THY uxpornra Kal Tov m&yov. Tov abrov de 
Tpomov Kat TaAAa Ta dudpeva oxnpotepa oupl~ 
Baiver ylvecba Kat yewReorepa Kal Aswdeorepa 
TO ev Tos mpooPdppots" T@V Tmpos vorov Kab Td. 
Tpoonveua Tav év Koidos: yYdyeTar yap mavTa 
pardrov, Kai eEarpiler to bypdv. oKAnptver pev 
obv Kat TO Deppov Kal 7 pvypov- e€arpilecbas 
yap tm audotrépwv ovpBaiver TO bypdv; b7o pw 
Tod Oepynod Kal? ab76, bo be Tob yvypod Kara 
ovpBeBnxds | (nera Tob Geppod yap ouvefépxera: 
ovbev yap dypov avev Oeppod). adda. TO pev 
yuxpov od povov oxAnpdver adAd Kal mUKVOL, TO 
d¢ Gepuov pavdrepov mrovei. 

Aca thv adtny 8 airiav Kai mpeaButépwv yuyvo- 
pévwv Tots ev Tpixas €xovor okAnporepas ylyvov- 
Tat at Tpixes, Tois 5€ mrepwrois Kat Aemidwrois 
TA TTEPA KAaL at Aemrides. Ta yap Séppara yiwerat 
oxnpdrepa Kat Taxbrepa mpeoBurépav yeyvo- 
even: Enpaiverat yap, Kal TO yinpds €oTt Kara, 
Tovvopa yenpov dud TO atroXcimew TO Oepyov Kat 
a avTod TO bypov. 

1 zpooBdppots A.-W.: apooBdépos PSZ: mpos Boppav vulg. 

* This is an important statement, and should be noted in 
connexion with Aristotle’s theories of the part played by 
fluid and, heat both in fourishment and in spontaneous 

520 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. m1. 

more is the depth at which they are found). Their 
spines are long because the growth of the body is 
diverted to them, since, as the creatures possess but 
little heat, they cannot concoct the nourishment, and 
so contain a great deal of residue ; ‘and it is out 
of residue that spines and hair and the like are 
formed. Their spines are hard and petrified on 
account of the cold and its congealing effect. And in 
the same way plants, too, are harder, and earthier, 
and more petrified if they grow where the aspect is 
northerly, or in a windy situation, than if they grow 
where the aspect is southerly, or in a sheltered spot. 
It is because they all get more chilled, and their fluid 
evaporates. Hardening, then, is brought about by 
both cold and heat : the effect of both is to cause the 
fluid to evaporate: it is evaporated by heat per se, 
but by cold per accidens—in the latter case the fluid 
accompanies the heat when it makes its exit, as there 
is no fluid withoutits heat.*¢ There is this difference, 
however : cold causes compression as well as harden- 
ing, whereas heat lightens a thing’s consistency.” 

For the same cause hair, feathers and scales in the 
various animals respectively become harder as they 
get on in years : it is because their skins grow harder 
and thicker then, and that is due to their drying up, 
and old age or to “ get on in years ” is something 
earthy (as the similarity of the word with yearth, the 
old form of “ earth,’”’ shows),° and this is due to the 
fact that the heat is failing and with it the fluid. 

generation. See also P.4. 652 b 8 ff. and App. B § 11 and 
§ 17 and note. 
» This hardly agrees with Aristotle’s statements elsewhere 
(¢.9-» 765 b 1 ff.) about the thickening effects of concoction. 
© This is a piece of * etymology * comparable with that 
of the original Greek : géras (old age), géé@ron (earthy). 

521 

783 b 

ARISTOTLE 

Dadraxpodvra 8 éemdrjrAws of dvOpwror pddvora 

10 TOv Cdwv. eote dé tt KaldAov 7d ToLvobrov mabos- 
Kat yap Tov duTdv Ta prev deidvdda ra Se dvdA- 
AoBore?, Kal TOV dpvibeov of dwAevovres diro~ 
BadAdAovat Ta mTEpa. Tovobrov d€ Tt maBos Kal 7 
dadakporns €oTiv emt Trev dvOpimev, 6 doous oUpee 
Baiver paraKpobobac Kar. Epos pev yap dmoppet 
15 Kal Ta guia Tots purois maou Kal TA TE pa Kal 
at Tpixes Tots EXOVaW, orav Ss | dbpoov yevnrar 
To 7alos, Aap Baver Tas etpnyievas erreanvy pias * 
paraxpotobat Te yap réyerau Kal dvdXoppoeiv. 
alrvov dé tod mdfovs evdeva bypornros Oeppas, 
Towobrov de padora T&v byp@v To Amapdv: b10 
200Kal tav duT@v ra Aumapa deidvdAa paGdAdAov. 
ddd mept pev ToUTaW ev dAAous 70 altiov Aekréov- 
Kal yap aAAa ovvairia ToUTOU Too mabous avrots. 
ylverat 5€ Tots pev gutois ev TO Xeypave TO 
mdos (abry yap % ~=pretaBoAy Kupunrepa Tijs 
jAucias) Kal Tots pwrevovar de Tov Cow (Kal 
25 yap TabTa ATTOV Tay avOpurwyv bypa Kat Deppea. 
THY pvow cory)’ ol &° avOpwror Tats HAuKias 
Xeyeava Kal Ogpos adyovow. 610 mply agdpodiovd- 
few od yiverat dadakpos ovdeis: Tore be Tots 
TovovTas THY pvow padov. poe yap €oTw 6 
eykéhados ypuypdtatov Tod OupaTos, 6 8 adpo- 
30 Sustacpos Katadyer: Kalapds yap Kat dvourijs 

+ {kai arepoppoeiv) addunt A.-W., Bekkerum  secuti; 
melius mT €poppuely Btf.; om. codd.; fort. dvddo<Boreivy Kat 
aT€po> ppueiv scrib. 

2 zovrov tod ZL rod Tovovrov vulg. 

« The Gk. has “ shedding of leaves,” but as there is no 
one English word for this, and as all three are referred to in 

522 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1. 

Of all animals human beings are the ones which Baldness. 
go bald most noticeably ; but still baldness is a 
general and widespread condition. Thus, although 
some plants are evergreen, others shed their leaves, 
and birds which hibernate shed their feathers. Bald- 
ness, in those human beings whom it affects, is a com- 
parable condition to these. Of course, a partial and 
gradual shedding of leaves takes place in all plants, 
and of feathers and hair in those animals that have 
them ; but it is when the shedding affects the whole 
of the hair, feathers, etc., at once that the condition is 
described by the terms already mentioned (baldness, 
moulting,® etc.). The cause of this condition is a 
deficiency of hot fluid, the chief hot fluid being 
greasy fluid, and that is why greasy plants tend more 
to be evergreen than others. However, we shall 
have to deal with the cause of this condition so far 
as plants are concerned in another treatise, since in 
their case there are other contributory causes of it. 
Now in plants this condition occurs in winter : this 
seasonal change overrides in importance the change 
in the time of life. The same is true of the hibernat- 
ing animals ; they too are in their nature less fluid 
and less hot than human beings. For human beings, 
however, it is the seasons of life which play the part 
of summer and winter ; and that is why no one goes 
bald before the time of sexual intercourse, and also 
why that is the time when those who are naturally 
prone to intercourse go bald. The reason is that 
the effect of sexual intercourse is to cool, as it is the 
excretion of some of the pure, natural heat, and the 

the context, I have kept the point by substituting ‘* moult- 
ing”: the Berlin edition and others actually insert the word 
for “‘ moulting ” into the Gk. text. 

523 

ARISTOTLE 

783 b (4) 4 > , / > > /, Ss € 
EppoTnTos amoKpiois eotw. edvdAdyws obv Oo 
eyképados aicbdverar mpOtov: 7a yap aobevh Kat 
pavrdws Eyovra puKpds airias Kal poms eorw. 
wor’ dv tis dvadoylanra Stu abrds te ddvydbeppos 
¢ > / wv > > ~ \ / / 
0 é€yképados, ett 8 advayKaiov to mépié Sépya 
35 Tovobrov elvar wGAdov, Kai TovTov Thy TaV TpLYaV 
/ if a > / > /, nn / 
dow, dow mAcloTov adéornKer, edAdyws av ddEEL€ 
Tots OTEpLaTiKots Tept TaUTHV THY HAukiav OUpL- 
U a \ \ aes > t 
Baivew dadaxpotoba. dia tiv adryy 8 airiav 
\ ~ ~ \ 4 / 7 
784 a Kat THs Kepadfs 76 mpdcbiov pdvov yivovtrar da- 
Aakpot Kai trav Cabwv ot dvOpwror povor, TO pev 
/, ae > ~ ¢ > 4, ~ A 4 
mpoabuov, ore evradla 6 eyxéedados, av de Cowy 
/ 7 \ a ” > , \ 
feovov, Ott TroAd mAciotov exer eyKédadov Kai 
uddvora vypov 6 avOpwros. Kat at yuvaikes od 
5 hadaxpobvra mapamAnoia yap % dvows TH TOV 
Tradl: dyova yap omeppatiuKns exKpicews apudd- 
Tepa. Kal evvobyos od yiverat dadakpos dua TO 
> ‘ - 4 ‘ A e ~ 
ets TO OfAv petaBddrew. Kal Tas vorTEpoyeveis 
4, * > / “ > /, n” ta 
Tpixas 7 ov dvovow 7 amoBdAdovow, dv TUywow 
~ ~ ¢ 
Exovtes of edvodyor, mARVY THS Bys* Kal yap at 
10 yuvaikes Tas prev odK E€xovar, Tas 8 emi TH HPN 
pvovow. 1 Se mHpwots avrTn ek Tod appevos eis 
To OAAv peraBodAn éorw. ) 
Tob d5€ ta prev dwdrcvovta madrw SactvecBar Kat 
Ta dvddoBoAjcavra mddw dew dvAAa, Tois Se 
dadakpots pr) dvadvecOar mdaAw, alrvov bre Tots 
15 wev at @pat tpomai eiot too owpatos paAdrov, 
wor emel petaBddAovow adrar, petaBaAdrer Kal 
‘ / A A > 4 A \ \ \ 
TO dvew Kat TO amoBdAdkew Tods péev Ta ATEpPA 

1 6 Z*: om. vulg. 

524 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. 1m. 

brain is by its nature the coldest part of the body ; 
thus, as we should expect, it is the first part to feel 
the effect : anything that is weak and poorly needs 
only a slight cause, a slight momentum, to make it 
react. So that if you reckon up (a) that the brain 
itself has very little heat, (6) that the skin surrounding 
it must of necessity have even less, and (c) that the 
hair, being the furthest off of the three, must have 
even less still, you will expect persons who are plenti- 
ful in semen to go bald at about this time of life. 
And it is owing to the same cause that it is on the 
front part of the head only that human beings go 
bald, and that they are the only animals which do so 
at all; ¢.e., they go bald in front because the brain is 
there,* and they alone do so, because they have by 
far the largest brain of all and the most fluid. Women 
do not go bald because their nature is similar to that 
of children : both are incapable of producing seminal 
secretion. Eunuchs, too, do not go bald, because of 
their transition into the female state, and the hair 
that comes at a later stage they fail to grow at all, 
or if they already have it, they lose it, except for the 
pubic hair: similarly, women do not have the later 
hair, though they do grow the pubic hair. This 
deformity constitutes a change from the male state 
to the female. 

The reason why the hair does not grow again in 
eases of baldness, although hair and feathers grow 
again on hibernating animals and leaves on deciduous 
trees, is that in the case of the animals and trees the 
seasons are the turning-points of their lives more 
{than in the case of man), and so when there is a 
change of season, then they follow suit and grow or 

* See P.A. 656 b 12. 
525 

784 a 

784 b 

ARISTOTLE © 

Kat tas tpixas, Ta dé dvAAa Ta duTd. Tois 8 
avOpwrois KaTa THY HAtKiay yiveror yetpav Kal 
Oépos Kal €ap Kal peTomwpov, wor emretB7)" at 
20 HAukiat o8 pretaBdAAovow, ovdé Ta maby Ta dia 
ravras petaBdAde, Kaimep Tis aitias opoias 
A 
ovans. 
Kai wept pev rad\Aa 7d0n Ta TOV Tpriy@v ayedov 
” 
elpnras. 
IV Tap dé Xpopdrov altvov Tots pev aAAots Coos, 
Kal ToO povdxpoa elvar Kal Tob mouKiAa, 7) TOO 
25 S€pyatos pvas: tots 8° avOpwrois oddev mAQV TeV 
Today od Tav dia yipas adda Tov bua vooov: 
ev yap TH Kkaovpevy Acvxn AevKai yivovrau at 
tpixes’ eav 8 at Tpixes wot Acvxat, ovK aKo- 
Aovbe? 7H Sépuare 7 AevKdTyHsS. aitov 8 dru at 
Tpixes ek Tot Sépparos dvovra ek vevoonkdoTos 
30 obv Kal AevKOD Tod Séppatos Kal 7 Opié ovvvocei, 
voaos dé Tpixos TroAudTns eoriv. 7 Sé dv HAcKiav 
TOv tpry@v modotyns yiverar dv aocbeveray Kal 
évderav Oepudtntos. Kal yap HAukia maoa pézet 
dmoxAivovros To owpuatos, Kal ev TO ynpds emi 
ywEw* TO yap yhpas puxpov Kal Enpdv é eoTw. det 
35 de voroae TV els EKAOTOV _Hopiov aducvovpevny 
Tpopiy OTe TéTTEL Lev 7 EV EKdOTwW” oiKeia Deppo- 
Tns, advvatovons Sé Pleiperas Kal mHpwors yiveTar 
7) vocos. axpiBéotepov dS€ mept THs ToLvadTys aitlas 
vorepov AekTéov €v Tois mepi ad&joews Kal Tpodijs. 
1 ered Z: émet vulg. 
2 &v exdorw PZ: om. vulg. 

@ Cf. 783. b 7, and De long. et brev. vit. 466 a 21; but 
according to Hippocrates, m. dvairns I. 33 (vi. 512 Littré), the 
aged are wuypoi Kal dypol. 

526 

ae 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. u1.—1v. 

shed their feathers or hair or leaves. In man, how- . 
ever, the spring, summer, autumn and winter of his 
life are not seasons according to the calendar but 
seasons of his own age ; so that, as these do not go 
through the cycle of change, neither do the conditions 
which depend on them ; although the cause which 
controls the change of conditions is a similar one in 
his case too. 

I think we have now diectised all the conditions 
that affect hair, except that of colour. 

In the rest. of the animals, the reason for the IV 
various colours of the hair, and for its being single- foio"r of 
coloured or variegated, is the nature of the skin. In 
man, however, this reason operates only in the case of 
the greyness of the hair due to disease (as when the 
hair becomes white during leprosy), not that due to 
old age, and if the hair is white, the whiteness does 
not derive from the skin. The reason is that the hair 
grows out of the skin, and thus when the skin out of 

__ which it grows is diseased and white the hair is itself 

_- affected by disease, and disease of hair is greyness. : 
On the other hand, the greyness which is due to age Greyness. 
is the result of weakness and deficiency of heat. 
Eyery age of life tends to gravitate into chilliness 
when the body’s vigour declines, and especially when 
this happens in old age, since old age is cold and dry.* 
We must bear in mind that the nourishment which 
reaches each part of the body is concocted by the 
heat in each part proper to it; and if this heat is 
unable to do its work the part suffers damage, and 
deformity or disease is the result. A more detailed 
account of this cause will have to be given in the 
treatise Of Growth and Nutrition.” In those persons 

> Not extant. 
527 

784 b 

10 

15 

20 

bo 
or 

ARISTOTLE 

id 

doots obv TOV avOpwirrwv ddydbeppds eotw % TOV 
Tpix@v pvots Kai mAElwy 1) elovotca byporns éori, 
THS oikelas Oeppornros dduvarovons TETTEW O7)- 
meTat v70 THs ev TH TEeptexovte Beppornros. 
yiverau dé onus b b770 Beppdrnros pev mdoa, ov THs 
cuudirou dé, womep cipntrar ev érépois. ott & 
9 ofiis Kal vdaTos Kal ys Kal TOV cwpatiK@v 
Tavrwv Tv ToLovTwr, 50 Kal THs yewdous ar- 
dos, ofov 6 Aeydopevos edpws: Kal yap 6 edpus 
€oTt oampoTyns yewdous atpidos. wate Kal 7 ev 
tais OpiEi ‘rovadtn ovea tpody od meTTomeryn 
onmeTal, Kal yiverar 7 KaAovpévn mroAud.  AevK?) 
dé, dtu Kal 6 edpws povov TaV caTpav ws eimety 
Aevkdv éorw. airiov 5€ rovrov dri moAdy exet 
dépa Tdoa yap 1) yeddns a atpis aépos éxet Sdvapuy 
TAXES. Bomep yap dvTEOTpapevov Th maxyy 6 
evpws €oTw: av pev yap mayh 7 aviodoa aris, 

, , 2 \ a a \ ‘ 
TIAXKVAH YLVETAL, EGY de oamTy, Eeupws. 310 KQL - 

> ~ > \ ” c \ > ‘ > ~ \ 
emumoAns eativ dudw- 7 yap atpis emimodfs. Kal 
ed 87) of mownral ev tails Kwpmdias peTrapéepovart 
okwmtovtTes, Tas TOMAS KaAodvTES yhpws edpOra 
Kal maxvnv. TO pev yap TO yever TO be TH cider 
~ > 
TavTov €oTW, 7) pev TaxXvN TH yever (atpIs yap 
~ lo »” 
apdw), 6 S€ edpws TO cider (ofyus yap audw). 
a ~ > 
onpetov 8 dtu Tovwobrdév €oTw* Kal yap eK voowv 
a A > / A 8° € 0. a 
moAAois modat avépveav, voTEepov byracbetar 
> ~ > 
péAawat avti TovTwv. aitiov 8 ore ev TH appw- 

@ At Meteor. 379 a 16 ff. See App. B § 11, add. note. 
» See 782 b 20, note. 

528 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. tv. 

where the nature of the hair has but little heat and 
the fluid which enters it is unduly plentiful, the heat 
proper to the hair is unable to do its work and the 
hair is putrefied by the heat present in the environ- 
ment. All putrefaction, of course, is caused by heat, 
but not by the innate heat. This has been stated 
elsewhere.* Water and earth and all such corporeal 
bodies are liable to putrefaction, and therefore the 
earthy vapour ® is liable to it as well; an example of 
this is what is called mould: mould is in fact the 
putrefaction of earthy vapour. So too the nourish- 
ment in the hair, being of this kind, putrefies if it 
does not get concocted, and what is called greyness 
results. It is white, because mould too is: white. 
This is practically the only putrefied substance which 
is white, and the reason for that is that it contains a 
good deal of air: actually all earthy vapour is the 
equivalent ° of thick air. In fact, mould is as it were 
the “opposite number ”’ of hoar-frost, since if the 
vapour which rises up gets congealed, hoar-frost is 
the result ; if it gets putrefied, mould. And that is 
why both occur on the surface, because vapour is on 
the surface. So we see that the poets use a good 
metaphor in their comedies when they jokingly call 
white hairs the “ mould ” and “ hoar-frost of age”: 
one of them is generically, the other specifically, the 
same as greyness : hoar-frost is the same generically 
(both being vapour), mould is the same specifically 
(both being putrefactions). Here is a sure sign that 
this is its character: there are many instances of 
people having grown grey hair as an aftermath of 
disease, but later on when they were restored to 
health dark hair took its place. The reason is that 

© For exer divapuw ef. 780 b 9, and Introd. § 26. 
529 

ARISTOTLE 
784 b / 7 ‘ \ 5A ry ~ > > Ps) / ~ 
oTia, WoTep Kal TO Aov' cHpa ev evdeia duoikis 
Beppdornrds cor, ovrw Kal T@v [aAXeov |? popiwv 
Kal 7a 7Tavv pLuKpa [eText Ths dppworias TAUTNS, 
TrepiTT@pa be mroAd eyyiverau ev Tols owpact Kal 
30 €v* trois popious- Sidmep 7 ev Tais capélv arrexpia 
mou Tas ToAids. wvyidvavtes d€ Kal loydoavres 
mdAw petaBdarAovar, Kal yivovTa, Womep eK ye- 
povTrwy véou' S10 Kal Ta man ovppetabardovow. 
opbds 8 exer Kal A€yew THv pev vocov yipas 
emikTyTOV, TO S€ yhpas vocov dvaikyv: mrowdar 
yobv véoot Twes TadTa amep Kal TO yhpas. 
35 Tovds 5€ kpotrddous todotvra: mp@tov. Ta pev 
785a yap omabev Keve. bypdéTnrdés €orTt dua TO a exe 
eynedadrov, TO be Bpéypa mroAXiy exer bypoTrynra* 
TO be Todd ovK evonmtTov. ai 8 év Tots kpotdgous 
tpixes 00’ ottTws dAliyov Exovow bypov wate TéT- 
Tew, ote TOAD WoTE 1) anmecaL* pecos yap wv 
56 Tomos audotépwy extos apdotépwv Tav Talav 
> 
€or. 
Ilepi prev ov ris tev avOpmmwv moddTHTOS 
” A ” 
elpnTat TO aiTLov. 
V_. Tots 8 dAAows Sdous Too 1) yiveoBar Sud TI 
ipAuxtay TAVTHVY THV petaBodny emdiAws TO avdTo 
altvov Orrep elpyrae Kal emt Tis. padaxporntos: 
10 dAiyov yap €xovor Kai <#rTov)* bypov Tov éyKé- 
dadov, wore py) e€advvareiv TO Oeppov mpos THV 
1 Sdov Em*, Aldus, A.-W.: ado vulg.; ef. 780 a 19. 
2 dMwyv secl. Btf. 

3 & PZ: om. vulg.: xai ev om. S. 
4 frrov coni. Bekker, ut videtur ; om. PSYZ. 

4 See 784 a 35, b 6, 786 a 20, and Introd. § 62. 
>’ See 784 a 2, n, 

530 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. tv.—v 

during a period of infirmity just as the whole body 
is afflicted by a deficiency of natural heat,’ so the 
parts, including even the very small ones, share in 
this infirmity; also, a great deal of residue is formed 
in the body and in its parts: hence the lack of con- 
coction in the flesh produces grey hairs. But when 
health and strength is restored, people accomplish a 
change, as it might be old men renewing their youth, 
and, in consequence, the conditions also accomplish 
a corresponding change. In fact, we might justifi- 
ably go so far as to describe disease as * ‘ adventitious 
old age ’’ and old age as “natural disease ” ; at any 
rate, some diseases produce the same effects as old 
age does. 

The temples are the first part to go grey, and the 
reason is this. The back of the head, since it contains 
no brain,” is empty of fluid. The bregma‘ contains a 
great deal; but a large volume of fluid does not 
easily putrefy. On the other hand, the hair on the 
temples has neither a small enough amount of fluid 
to secure concoction for it, nor a large enough amount 
for it to avoid putrefaction, as this region of the head 
is intermediate between the two extremes, and 
therefore stands outside both of these two conditions. 

We have now given the reason for greyness so far 
as man is concerned. 

The reason why this change does not noticeably V 
occur on account of age in the other animals is the 
same as the one already given in the case of baldness : 
their brain is small and (less) fluid,? thus the heat 
does not become completely unable to effect concoc- 

© See 744 a 25, n. 
# The insertion of “ less * is necessary to the sense: man’s 
brain is the most fluid of all (see 784 a 4). 

531 

785 a 

15 

20 

bo 
or 

ARISTOTLE 

méfuv. tots &° immous [adr@v}' emvonpaiver pddvora 

dv iopev Cwwyv, drt AenTéTaTov TO daTOby Ws KATA 
/ 0 ” \2 \ \ > / ~ ” 

pLéyeBos Exovor 70° TrEepi Tov eyKédadrov THY GAAwv. 

, > , ¢ 13? \ gis 
Tekpnpvov 8° ott Kaiplos 7%) mAnyi® €is Tov TOTO 

~ / > a A \ 7 M4 
Tobrov yiverar adrois: 810 Kai “Opnpos ottws 
eTroinaev 

iva‘ re mp@rax tpixes immwyv 
/ >? 4 Ul > 
Kpaviw eumedvaor, uddAvora de Kaipidv eorww. 

padiws obv emippeovons Ths bypornros dua TH 
AertoTnTa Tod ooTod, Tis dé Depyornros €dAAc- 
movens dua THY HAkiav, emimoAobyvra ai Tpixes 
atta. Kal af muppat dé Oarrov modobvrar Tpixes 
ta&v perAawav €or. yap Kal 1 muppdryns warrep 
dppwortia tpiyds, Ta 8 aobevn ynpdoKcer mavTa 
Oarrov. pedavtépas S€ yiveobat ynpacKovoas 
Aéyerat Tas yepdvous. altiov 8° av ein Tod maBovs 
To dvoe vypotepar® adrav clvar THY THY TTEp@v 
dvow, mAgov Te ynpackovTwy elvar TO Uypov ev 
Tois MTEpois 7) WoTE eVonTTOV® elvaL. 

"Ore Sé ylyverar 7) Toda oniper Twi, Kal OTL ODK 
€oTW, WoTEp olovTai TWes, avavois, ONpElov TOD 
mpotépov pybévtos’ To Tas oKxeTralopevas Tpixas 
mirows 7) KaAvppaor TroAodcba. Oarrov (ra yap 

1 secl. Bekker: adrdv PSY et Z* (non aro): todro coni. 
A.-W.; causa autem proprie apparet in equis X, unde yidetur 
olim aiziov émonpuaivew scriptum fuisse. 

7o Z*: om. vulg. 

% wAny? PZ: 4 mAny7 H vulg. 

o@ text. Hom. 

bypotépay A.-W.: Aevxorépay vulg.: Aerrorépay Btf. 
evonnrov Platt: evonmrérepov vulg. 

Tod mporépov pnbév7os secl. A.-W., om. &. 

- cw 

sao oO 

532 

— 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. v. 

tion. Of all the animals known to us, it is most 
marked in the horse, the reason being that in the 
horse the bone which surrounds the brain is, in pro- 
portion to the animal’s size, thinner than that of any 
other animal. A proof of this is that a blow delivered 
on this spot is fatal to a horse. Homer’s lines ¢ fit in 
with this too : 
Where on a horse’s skull his hairs first grow 
And where he suffers his most fell and fatal blow. 
Therefore, since the thinness of the bone makes it 
easy for the stream of fluid to flow to the hair at this 
place, and as the heat begins to fail on account of 
age, the result is that this hair goes grey. Reddish 
hair goes grey more quickly than black, as redness 
too is a sort of infirmity of the hair, and everything 
that is weak ages more quickly.” Cranes, however, 
so it is alleged, go darker as they get older. If this 
allegation is true, the reason for this condition would 
be that the nature of their feathers is more fluid, and 
that as the birds grow old the fluid in their feathers 
is too plentiful to putrefy easily.° 
Here are proofs (a) that. greyness is produced by 
putrefaction of some sort, and (6) that it is not, as 
some people imagine, a process of withering. Proof 
of (a). Hair that is protected by hats or other cover- 
ings goes grey more quickly, the reason being that 
the effect of the wind blowing is to prevent putrefac- 
* Iliad VIII. 83-84 
» See 775 a 19 ff. 
© See above, 785 a 2. 
533 

785 a 

785 b 

30 

35 

5 

10 

“ARISTOTLE _ 

, 4 \ a c \ / 7 
mvevpata KwAvet THY of, 7 Sé oKemn amvolav 
a \ \ A \ a” \ a~ & 
mrovct), Kal TO Bonbeiv rHv dAcusuw tiv Tob Bdaros 
Kal Tod €Aalov puyvupevwv. TO pev yap vowp 

7 A + eS , , / 
pdyer, TO 8 EAasov pryvdpevov KwAver EnpaiveoBar 
Taxews' TO yap vdwp edv&jpavrov. dott 8 ovK 
€oTw avavois, 00d woTrep 1) 7rda adavojevy ev-= 

/ ” \ € / a o he tN 
KaiveTat, ovTwW Kal 1 OpiE, onpetov dt. pvovras 
edléws eviat troAvai': advov 8 odfev dverar. Aev- 
Kaivovtat 5€ Kal em’ adKpov moAAai: ev yap Tots 
eoxatos Kat AerroTdTois €haxiorn Oepporns ey- 
yiveTau. 

Tots 8 adAdows Cdbous Gaows yivovrar AevKat at 

/ , > > > / t / 
tpixes, pvcer add’ od wafer ovpBaiver yiveoBar 
TobTo. aituov d€ TOV xpwudrwv To Sépya Tots 
” ral \ \ nl \ / ~ 
aAdos* THY pev yap AevKdv AcvKov TO Sepa, TOV 
dé peAdvwy pédav, TOv S€é TmoikiAwy Kal yuyvonevwv 
ex ovupyl€ews TH mev AevKov TH S5é péAav daiverar 
Bld 2 A \ a > 4 > \ ” \ , 
ov. emt de TOV avOpwrewv odbev airiov To déppa* 

\ \ c \ f. Ud ” ” 
Kal yap ot AevKot ofddpa pcdaivas Exovow. altvov 
8’ éte Aemrorarov tavtwv déppa 6° avOpwios exer 
ws Kata péyebos, Sudtrep odfev iayver mpds TV 

~ ~ / > \ \ A > v4 \ 
TaV TpiyOv petaPodAjy, adda bia THY acbéveray TO 
déppa Kai freraBdAAe adro tiv ypdav, Kal yiverat 
tO jNAiwy Kal mvevpaTwy peAdvTEpov: at 5é Tpixes 

> \ / > A cal + A 
ovlev cuppetaBddrrAovow. év dé Tots aAdAows TO 
dépua ywpas exer Svvapw dia TO maxos* B10 at 

1 Guat wodvai conieceram, quod et ipsi codd.* habent: 

éviot toot Bekker (per errorem, ut vid.*). 
26 Z: om. vulg. 

534 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. v. 

tion, and the protection keeps off the wind. Also, it 
is an assistance if the hair is anointed with a mixture 
of oil and water. This is because, although the 
water cools it, the oil which is mixed with it prevents 
the hair from drying off quickly, water being easily 
dried off. (6) The following proves that greyness is 
not a form of withering, and that when hair goes 
white it is not due to withering, as it is in the case of 
grass. Some hairs are grey from the very beginning 
of their growth, and nothing begins its growth in a 
withered condition. In many instances, too, hairs 
go white at the tip; this is because very little heat 
gets into parts which are at the extreme end and 
very thin. 

In certain of the other animals white ‘hairs make 
their appearance ; but this is natural and not due to 
any affection. The reason of the colours in these 
other animals is the skin: thus, if they are white, 
the skin is white; if black, the skin is black; if 
piebald, made up of a mixture of colour, the skin is, 
we find, white in some places and black in others. 
In the case of human beings, however, the skin has 
nothing whatever to do with it, for even people with 
white skin have intensely black hair. The reason for 
this is that, for his size, man has the thinnest skin of 
all animals, and on that account it has no power at 
all to effect any change in the hair ; instead of that, 
the skin, by reason of its own weakness, changes its 
colour itself, and also is darkened by the action of 
the sun and the wind, while the hair undergoes no 
simultaneous change at all. With the other animals, 
the skin, on account of its thickness, possesses the 
character of the region in which the animal lives ; 
and that is why the hair changes in accordance with 

535 

785 b 

ARISTOTLE — + 

prev Tpixes KaTa Ta d€ppara peraBddAovar, Ta de 
15 déppara obBev Kata Ta mvedpara Kal TOV HALoV. 
VI Tév d€ Caw ra pév ear povdxpoa (Aéyw dé 
[Lovoxpoa wv TO yevos dAov Ev ypOua Eyer, olov 
Aéovres muppot mavtes’ Kal TobTo. Kat én’ dpviwv 
Kad em ixOvuv cork Kat TOV GAAwy Cobwv opotws) 
20 ra Se Tord Xpow puev, OAdxpoa dé (Adéyew d€ dv TO 
o@pa oAov ry abriy €xet xpoay, olov Bots éortv 
GAos AevKOS Kai GAos péAas), Ta DE TOLKiAa. TodTO 
de duyds, TA prev TO yéver, wWorrep mapdardis Kal 
Taws, Kal TOV lyOdwv evo, olov at KadAovpevar 
Opatra.- tav S€ TO ev yévos amav ov motkidoy, 
ywovra dé mouxiror, ofov Boes Kai atyes, Kal ev 
Tots Opvicwv, olov at mepiorepat: Kal ddAa dé yevn 
TO atvTo maoxer TOV dpvidwv. petaBddAAn dé Ta 
OAdxpoa 7oAA@ pGAAov THY povoypdwyv, Kai Ets 
THVv aAAjAwy xpdav thy andjv, otov ex AevKav 
péAava Kal ex peAdvewv AevKd, Kal peptypeva e& 
30 dudotépwrv, dia TO dAw TO yever dmdpyew ev TH 
dvcer TO py pilav exew xpdav: edKivnTov yap 
bmdpye. em duddtepa TO yévos, WoTE Kal Els 
aAAnda peraBdardAew Kat mouxiAA\eoBar paddov. Ta 
d€ povdypoa tobvavtiov: od yap peTtaBadAn, ay 
pi) Sia aos, Kai TobTo omdviov: ydn yap @mrae 
Kat mépdvé AevK7) Kal Kopagé Kal otpovbds Kai 
apKTos. ovpBaive. 5€ Tabra, drav ev TH yevéeoer 

bo 
or 

oo 
or 

* A fish called thritta is mentioned at H.A. 621 b 16 (and 

fragment 285, 1528 a 40), which is supposed to be the shad. 

Aristotle’s diagnosis is essentially correct. . Albinism is 

not “‘ natural,’’ but an “ affection ’’ due to absence of pig- 
ment. ; 

536 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. v.—v1. 

the skin in the various instances, whereas the skin 
does not change at all in accordance with the winds 
and the sun. 

Of the animals, some are single-coloured (by 
which I mean that the whole class has a single colour 
only, e.g., all lions are tawny ; and a similar thing 

VI 
Colour- 
changes 

obtains in the case of birds, fish, and the other — 

animals) ; others are many-coloured, yet at the same 
time whole-coloured (by which I mean that the whole 
body is of the same colour, e.g., an ox is white all 
over, or dark all over); others still are variegated. 
“ Variegated ” has two meanings : (a) as referred to 
a class of animals—like the leopard, and peacock, and 
certain fishes, for instance the thratta,? as it is called ; 
(b) sometimes the class as a whole is not variegated, 
but variegated individuals are found : examples are, 
oxen and goats, and certain birds, e.g., pigeons, and 
there are other classes of birds where this same 
condition is found. Change of colour is much com- 
moner among the whole-coloured animals than among 
the single-coloured, both (a) the reciprocal change 
between the individual colours (found in the class), 
z.e., one simple colour changes into another, e.g., white 
animals produce black ones and black ones white ; and 
also (6) the change which results in a mixture of the 
two. The reason for this is that it is a natural attri- 
bute of the whole class not to have one single colour : 
the class is mobile in both directions, and so provides 
more examples of interchange of colours and also of 
variegation. The single-coloured animals behave in 
the opposite way to this : they do not change, unless 
owing to some affection, and then but rarely ; thus, 
cases have been observed of a white partridge,® raven, 
sparrow, and bear. These results occur when the 

537 

786 a 

ARISTOTLE 

Svaorpadi: eUpOaprov yap Kal edKivn TOV TO pa- 
Kpov, TO dé yuyvojtevov ToLovToV* ev jUuKP@ yap 1 
apx7) Tots yuyvopevots. 

tora Se petaBadovor Kal Ta pvoet 6Adxpoa" 
jeev 6 ovra, TO yéver dé ToXdXpoa,, dua Td. vdara: Td. 

5 ev yap Bepud Aeveeny Trovet TIP Tpixa, Ta. de 

buxpa peAatvay, aomep Kal emt TOV gutav. alTvov 
o Ort 7a Bepua mvedpatos mA€ov exer 3 vdaTos, 
6 S dnp diadawvopevos Aevkornra mrovel, xabdrrep 
Kal Tov adpov. Sdiadeper pev odv, dorrep Kal Ta 
déppata ta dia aos AcvKa THv. dia THv dvow, 

wa \ > cal \ iA \ / nn ‘ 
10 obrw Kat ev Tats Opi€iv 4 Te Sua vocov H Kas 

*pckiav Kal i) dua pvow Aeudrns Trav Tpix@v TO 
TO aiTLov eTepov elvae* 7as pev yap 1 vou 
Depporns Trove? Acunds, Tas 8 u) aAAotpia. TO de 
Aevkov 6 drpudadns anp TapeXeTau eyKaraxAc~ 
pevos ev maow. 510 Kal doa 1) povexpod €or, 
Ta bro TH yaorepa mdvra Acuxdrepd €orw. Kal 
yap Oepporepa Kal TOvKpewrepa mdvra TO. Aeviea 
ws eimety e€oti dud THY avriv airtay: 7) bev yap 
Treypus yAvKéa Trovel, THv Oe mew TO Beppov. 7 
o avT? aitia Kal TOV [Lovoxpowy per, peAdvey 
 AcvKav: Depporns yap Kal puxporns airta Tis 
picews Too dépparos Kal TOV Tpix@v- exe yap 
ExaoTov T@V popiwy DepudryTa olkeiav. 

1 6Adxypoa Z?*m (non E*), Aldus, A.-W.: ovdxpoa Z?, 

vulg.: et alteratio colorum generum animalium que sunt na- 
turaliter multorum colorum erit multociens propter etc, X. 

2 Cf t75 a 9. 
> Cf, 735 b 8—736 a 20. 
© See 784 b 7, n. 
@ Cf. 784 a 34, b 6, 27, and Introd. § 62. 

538 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vr. 

creature suffers some distortion during the process of 
its formation, for, since the beginning of things that 
pass through such a process is on a small scale, they 
are small at that time, and what is small can easily 
be given a_different turn and spoilt.* 

The ones that change most are those which, though 
whole-coloured by nature, belong to a class which is 
many-coloured. This is due to the varieties of water 
involved. Hot water makes the hair white, cold 
water makes it dark, which is exactly what happens 
in the case of plants. The reason is that the hot ones 
contain more preuma than they do water, and it is the 
air shining through that causes the whiteness, just as 
it makes froth white.? Therefore, just as there is a 
_ difference between skins that are white by nature 
and those that are white owing to some affection, so 
there is a difference between the whiteness of hair 
which is due to nature and that which is due to disease 
or age—and the difference lies in the fact that the 
cause is different. In the former case, the whiteness 
is caused by the natural heat, in the latter, by ex- 
traneous heat.° It is the vaporous air shut up inside 
them which produces whiteness in all things; and 
that, too, is why those animals which are not single- 
coloured are all whiter under the belly than else- 
where. Thus too practically all white animals are 
hotter and tastier for the same cause: their good 
flavour is produced by concoction, and concoction is 
produced by heat. And the same cause holds also 
in the case of those animals which, being single- 
coloured, are either dark or white ; since it is heat 
and cold which are the cause of the nature of the 
skin and of the hair, each of the parts of the body 
having its own proper heat.? 

539 

ARISTOTLE I 
es “Ere 8 at yrAarra Svapépovor TOv amrOv te 
Kal TroukiAwy Kat Tov atv pev Siadepdvrow dé, 
olov AevKav Kal peAdvwv. aitiov 5é TO etpnpevov 
Tporepoy, OTL TA Séppara ToukiAa TOV Troucihwy, 
25 Kal TOV Aevicorpixwy Kal TOV peAavorpixev TOV 
pev AevKa Tv be pédava.. THY d€ yA@rrav Set 
broAaBeiv Worep Ev pdpiov TOV eEwrepiKa@v etvar, 
ra Ott ev TO oropare oxeTalerat, aN’ olov xelpa 
7 78a" aor e7rel Tav moukiAwy To dépua ov 
povexpwv, Kai TOO emt TH yAwTTn Sépyatros TobT 
airwov. 

30 MeraBddAdrova dé ra xpwpara Kai Tov opvibwr 
TWWes Kal THY TeTpaTOdWY TOY aypiwy eva KaTa 
Tas Wpas. altiov 8 dt. wWomep ot avOpwmor KaTa 
TIV iAuciav peraBadMovor, Toor” exeivots ovpBai- 
vel Kara Tas wpas* pile yap diadopa airy Tis 
KaTa TV jAukiav Tpomis. 

35 Eiot 5€ kai ta Trapdaywrepa troiiArdtrepa ws 
emi to mAciotov" eimeiv edAdyws, olov at péAtT- 

786 b Tat provdxpoa paddov 7 at avOphvat Kat ofijKes: 

el yap at tpodai airiar tHs petaBoAjs, evAdoyws 
at mouxidar tpodai mavTrodatwrépas modo. Tas 
Kwhoes Kal Ta TEepiTTwMpaTa THS Tpodys, €€ av 
5 Kal Tpixes Kal mTEpa” Kal dépuara yiverac. 
Kai zepi pev xpwudtwr® Kai tpixy@v diwpicbw 
TOV TpOTrOV TOUTOV. 
Vil Ilepi dé dwvijs, 67e Ta ev Baptdwva tov Caowv 

1 areiorov Z: wAROos vulg. 2 wrepa Z: arida vulg. 
3 ypdpatos YZ: Sepudtrwy P: Sepudrwy xpwparos coni. 
A.-W. 

« This apparently means the same as “ whole-colour 
540 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vi.-vi. 

Further, the tongues of animals differ: those of 

the simple-coloured * animals, those of the variegated 
ones, and those of the ones which, though simple- 
coloured yet differ among themselves (as, e.g., dark 
and white)—the tongues of these are all different. 
The reason is that which has been stated already, 
viz., that the skins of variegated animals are varie- 
gated, the skins of white-haired ones are white and 
of dark ones dark. The tongue we should look upon 
as being, as it were, one of the external parts of 
the body, comparable, e.g., with the hand or foot, dis- 
regarding the fact that it is being covered in by the 
mouth. So that, as the skin of the variegated animals 
is not single-coloured, this will be the reason respon- 
sible for the skin on the tongue as well. 

Some birds and some wild quadrupeds change their seasonal 
colour according to the seasons of the year. The hiner of 
reason is that, just as human beings change according 
to their age, so these change according to the seasons, 
because this constitutes a greater difference so far as 
they are concerned than the change according to age. 

peaking generally, the more omnivorous animals Erfect of 

are more variegated, as we should expect (for in- “45% 
stance, bees are more single-coloured than hornets 

and wasps), for of course if the various sorts of 
nourishment they take are the causes of the change, 

we shall expect to find that variegated kinds of 
nourishment make the movements which the nourish- 

ment undergoes and the residues which result from 

it more variegated, and it is out of the residues that 

hair, feathers, and skin are formed. 

This concludes our account of the various colours, 
and the various kinds of hair. 

With regard to the voice: some animals have a VII 

Voice. 

541 

786 b 

: ARISTOTLE’ 

earl, Ta 8 d€0dwva, Ta S evrova Kal mpds apdo- 
Tépas €xovTa Tas brrepBohas. OULPLETPWS, ére de 
10 Ta bev peyadoduva Ta dé pucpopova., Kat AevoTynTe 
Kal Tpay’rnT. Kal cdxapupia Kal dcapupig, bua- 
pépovra dMijAwr, eTLOKETTEOV dua Tivas airias 
pee Sa ToUTWwY EKaGTOV. TeEpl ev ov O€UTHTOS 
Bapirnros THY adray aitiay olnréov civat 

fireep emt THS peraBorjs 7) ay peraBadrer véa ovTa 
15 Kal mpeopvTepa. Ta pev yap aAAa mavra vecTepa 
ovta o€vrepov pbéyyerar, Tav dé Body ot pooyot 
Bapurepov. 7o 8 avdro ovpPaivee kai ent tav 
appévwv Kai Onrc@v- év pev yap Tots dAdo 
yévest TO OfAv o€drepov dbéyyeras tod appevos 
(udAwora 8 émidnAov emt tv avOpdrwv tobtro- 
20 pdAvora yap TovTos Tadrqy TH Sdvapuy amro- 
dédwkev 7) y pvas dua TO Ady xpiaba povous Tov 
Cour, Too Oe Adyou bAnv elvar ri porn), emt 
Sé ray Bodv robvavriov: Bapdtrepov yap at OyAevat 
dléyyovrar tav tavpwv. Tivos pev obv Eevexa 
dwviy exer Ta CHa, Kal ti €ott dwvt) Kal GAws oO 
25 pogos, TO [ev ev Tois mrepi aiaOycews elpyTa, Ta 
oy ev Tots Tepi puxis- evet S€ Bapvd pev eoTw 
ev TO Bpadetay elvau TH Kivnow, of) 8 ev TO 
Taxeiav, ToD! Bpadéws 7 7 Taxéws TOTEPOV TO KWwoby 
airvov 7 TO Kwovpevor, exe Tuva amropiav. dact 
yap Twes To pev moAd Bpadéws | Kuvetobau TO 5° 
30 oAiyov Taxéws, Kat Tavrny airiav elvat Too Ta pev 
Bapidwva <civar ta 8° o€ddwva, AéyovTes péxpt 
Twos KaA@s, dAws 8 od Kadds. TH pev yap 

1 sod Y, Platt, Hayduck: od d€ vulg.: tod 3) O*, Bit. 

* See 787 b 1, n. >» See 446 b 5 ff. 
542 

_ whi be ee & 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vu. 

deep * voice, others a high-pitched voice, others a 
well-pitched voice, suitably proportionate between 
the two extremes ; some, too, have big voices, others 
small ones; also they differ in respect of being 
smooth, or rough, flexible and inflexible. So we 
must consider what are the causes to which each of 
these is due. With regard to the pitch, the same 
eause is to be held responsible as that which controls 
- the change which they undergo in passing from 
youth to age. All animals when younger have a 
higher voice, except calves, which have a deeper one. 
The same occurs as between male and female as 
well: in all animals (except cattle) the female has a 
higher voice than the male, and this is especially 
noticeable in human beings, for Nature has given 
them this faculty in an exceptional degree because 
they alone among the animals use the voice for 
rational speech, of which the voice is the “ material.” 
In cattle the reverse obtains: cows have a deeper 
voice than bulls. We have explained partly in the 
treatise Of Sensation,” partly in that Of the Soul,° for 
what purpose animals have a voice, and what “ voice ”’ 
is, and generally what sound is. But since deepness 
of pitch consists in the movement being slow, and 
height of pitch in its being fast, the question is 
whether the speed is caused by that which initiates 
or that which experiences the movement, and this 
is somewhat puzzling. Some people hold that the 
movement of a large volume is slow and that of a 
small volume fast, and that this is the cause why some 
animals have deep voices and others high ones. Up 
to a point this statement is satisfactory, but not 
completely so. It is, of course, correct to say that, 

© See 419 b 3—420 b 23. 
543 

786 b 

787 a 

ARISTOTLE 

yéver opbds eouxe A€yeobar 7d Bapd ev peyeler twit 
elvat Tob Kwvoupevov. ei yap TodTo, Kal jLLKpOV 
kat Bapd dbéyEacbar od pddiov, dpotws dé oddé 

35 péya’ Kai o€3. Kal Soxet yevvaorépas elvar 

, ¢ , \ > ~ / A \ 
dvoews 7) Bapudwria, kat ev tots péAco TO Bapv 
Ta@v auvTdvwey BéAtiov: TO yap BéATiov ev brepoyy, 
¢ \ / ¢ / > > > 7 > 
» Se Bapdtns trepoyy tis. GAN ered} eorw 
4 \ \ \ ek > ~ , 
Erepov 76 Bapd Kat og ev puvf peyadodwrias 
kal puxpopavias (€ore yap Kal d€ddwva peyadd- 

5 pura, kal puxpoparva Bapipava doadrws), opoiws 

d€ Kal Kata Tov puécov Tovov ToUTWwY: TEpl wv 
rive dv tis dAAw Siopiceser (Aéyw Sé peyadodwviay 
Kat puxpodwriav) 7) mAjnder Kal oAvyornte Tod 
Kiwvovpevov; ¢i ody Kata Tov AEeydouevoy éoTar 
Suoptopov TO 0&0 Kal Bap, ovpByoerar Ta adra 

10 elvar Baptdwva Kal peyadddwva Kal d€ddwva Kal 

/ ~ \ ~ ” > \ 
pukpopwva. Todro dé yeddos. aitiov 8 dru TO 
péya Kal TO puKpoV Kal TO TOAD Kal TO OGAlyov Ta 
prev atrA@s A€yerar, TA 5€ pos aAAnAa. peyado- 
dwva pev obv €otiv év TH TOAD amA@s elvan TO 

4 / \ ~ x\7 4 
Kwovpevov, pikpddwva d€ TO dAiyov, Bapidwva 

15 d€ Kal d€dwva ev TH pos aAAnAa TadrTynv Exew 

\ / 3A \ \ € / \ tA 
Thv diadopav. éay pev yap brepéyn TO Kwovpevov 
Tihs Tod KwodvTos ioxtos, avayKn Bpadéws Pépe- 
afar To hepopevov, av 8 drepexyntar, Tayews. TO 

1 péya coni. A.-W.: vociferatio votis magne acute est in- 
possibilis X: Bapd vulg. : 

* This, as appears from the next sentence, means the 
amount producing the movement as compared with the 
amount undergoing it. 

544 

Ae Se a. ee 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vu. 

in general, deepness depends upon a certain size of 
that which is set in movement; but if the statement 
were wholly true, it would not be easy to utter a 
noise simultaneously small and deep, nor, similarly, 
large and high. Further, a deep voice seems to be 
the mark of a nobler nature, and in melodies, too, 
that which is deep-pitched is better than the high- 
pitched, since deepness is a form of superiority, and 
it is in superiority that betterness resides. In fact, 
however, deep and high pitch of the voice is a different 
matter from largeness and smallness of the voice, for 
some animals which have high-pitched voices are 
large-voiced, and in the same way some which have 
deep-pitched voices are small-voiced ; and the same 
applies to the intermediate pitch between the two. 
And what other means is there for defining large- 
ness and smallness of voice apart from the volume of 
that which is set in movement ? So then, if high and 
deep pitch are to be distinguished according to the 
definition mentioned above, the result will be that 
any animal which has a deep voice will also have a 
large one, and any which has_a high voice will also 
have a small one. And this is not true. The reason 
is that the terms “ large,” “small,” and “large 
amount,’ “ small amount ” are sometimes used in an 
absolute sense, sometimes relatively to each other. If 
an animal has a large voice, this is because the amount 
of that which is set in movement is large absolutely, 
if small, the amount is small absolutely ; whereas high 
pitch and low pitch are due to the amounts ¢ involved 
being large and small relatively to each other. Thus, 
if that which is set moving exceeds the strength of 
that which sets it moving, then that which is pro- 
pelled is bound to go slowly; if it is exceeded, it 

T 545 

787 a 

787 b 

ARISTOTLE 

a 5 ~ ~ 
&° iaxdov dia tHv ioydy été pév odd Kwodv Bpa- 
a a \ / € \ ; a 
detav movet tiv Kivnow, oré dé did TO Kparetv 
20 Taxelav. Kata Tov adrov dé Adyov Kal T@v Kwovv- 
A > ~ ~ ~ 
Twv Ta aobevi Ta pev mAciw KwodvTa THs Suva- 
flews Ppadeiav moved tHv Kivnow, ta Se 8 
acbévevav ehiyon KwobvTa 5 TONERG . 
¢ 
At per obv aitias TOv evayTiacewy adtar, TOO 
7, 
pnre tavra Ta véa d€ddwva eivar pyntre Bapddwva, 
/ A , / \ ” \ 4 
25 unte Ta mpeaBUrepa, pte Ta Appeva Kal OyAca, 
\ A F 
mpos O€ TovTOLS Kal TOD Tos KadpvovTas o&D 
pléyyecbar Kai tods «db TO oHpa exovras, ett dé 
Kal yépovtras ywopevouvs paAAov o€udwvoréepous 
UJ ~ a ~ 
yiwecbar, THs HAiKias evavTias ovens TH TAY vewr. 
A \ s a 4 + ‘ /, > 
Ta pev obv mAciora vedtepa ovta Kal Ondea de 
> / s\/ ~ .7 > / 4 > i 
30 aduvapiay dArAlyov Kwodvra aépa d€idwvd eorww: 
\ \ ¢ 3\7 / \ A AY LP ant a 
Taxv yap 6 dAlyos dépetar, TO dé Tayd ofd ev 
~ c \ 7 ‘ ¢ / ¢€ P = 
dwvy. ot d€ pooxor Kai at Boes at OyjAcvaL, oF 
A \ \ e / ¢ ‘A \ \ , ~ 
pev dia THV HAtKiav, at dé dia THY dvow THs 
OnrdTHTOS, ovK ioyupov ExovOL TO OpLoV @ KWodaL, 
\ A ~ / / > \ A A 
moAd dé Kwotvta Bapidboyyd éorw: Bapd yap To 
/ / ¢ \ A >\ , 
Bpadéws depopevov, 6 Sé€. modds aip pepeTat 
Bpadéws. aodAdy S€ Kwoto. radra, Ta 6°’ GAN 
2,7 \ \ \ > A > e ~ , - 
dXiyov, Sua TO TO ayyetov bu” of mp@rov déperat 
a wi hid 
TO Tveda, ToUTOLS prev SudoTHM Exew peya Kal 

* The Greek word includes both meanings; and_ this 
circumstance explains a good deal of what Aristotle says in 
the present discussion. 

546 

See 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vu. 

will travel quickly. So then,the movement which a 
strong agent produces is sometimes slow (é.e., when, 
in virtue of its strength, it is moving a large amount), 
and sometimes fast (é.e., when the agent has the 
upper hand). In accordance with the same line of 
argument, in some cases the moyement which a weak 
agent produces is slow (2.e., when the agent is setting 

' in movement an amount which is too large for its 

strength), in other cases the movement is fast (2.e., 
when owing to the agent’s weakness the amount 
which it sets moving is small). 

Such, then, are the causes to which these. con- 
trarieties are due. We have shown (a) why neither 
young, nor old, nor male nor female animals all have 
high-pitched voices or all have deep voices ; (6) why 
sick and healthy alike speak in a high-pitched voice ; 
and (c) why, as men reach old age, the pitch of*their 
voice rises, although old age is the opposite of youth. 

On account of their debility, most animals when 
young, and most females, set but a small amount of 
air in movement and therefore have high-pitched 
voices, because a small amount is propelled at a fast 
speed, and where the voice is concerned fast means 
high. In calves, however, owing to their age, and in 
cows, owing to the nature of femininity, the part by 
means of which they set (the air) in movement is not 
strong, and as they set a large amount of it in move- 
ment, they have deep voices, for a large amount of 
air travels slowly, and anything that travels slowly is 
heavy (deep).* A large amount (of air) is set in 
movement by these animals, but only a small amount 
by the others, the reason being that in the former 
the vessel through which their breath first travels has 
a large opening and is therefore forced to set a large 

547 

ARISTOTLE 

787 b ; 
5 ToAdy avayKkdaleobar dépa Kweiv, tots 8 aAdows 

edrapievtov elvat.  mpotovons dé Tis AAKias 
ioxveu HaMov TOOTO TO }Optov TO Kivobv ev EKd- 
oTOLs, wore petaBaddrAovow eis sTovvavriov, Kal Ta 
pev d€idwrva Bapudwvdtepa yiverat aura avTa@v, 
7a 5€ Bapidwra d&vdwvdtepa Sidtep ot Tadpo. 

10 o€vpwvdrepor TOV pooywv Kal TOV Ondrevv Bodv. 
€oTt pev ovv maow 1 loxyds év Tots vedpous, S10 
Kat Ta akpalovta ioyver paAdov. davap$pa yap 
Ta véa paAdrov Kal dvevpa. ert dé Trois pev vous 
ovmw emirératat, Tots 5€ yeynpaKdow" Hon avetrav” 
% ovvrovias 810 audw dobevi Kal advvara mpos 

15 TV Kkivnow. pddora 8° of _Tabpor veupudets, kal 
uv) Kapoia®: diomEp ovvTovoy Exovat TOOTO TO HSpuov 
a) Kavodar TO Tvedpua, aomep xopony TeTapLevny 
veupivnv. OndAot dé tovadrn tiv dvow ovoa 7 
Kapdia TOv Body TO Kal dotodv eyyiveoBar ev 
eviais abt@v: 7a.8° dora Cnret thy Tod vevpov 
vow. 

20 "Exrepropeva dé 7avra els TO Ody peraBdMer, 
kal dua TO aviecBar Thy toydv THY veupwon ev TH 
dpxf opolav apinor poviyy Tots Sircow, 97 8 
gvecis TapamrAnota yiverau aomep av et Tis Yoponv 
Katateivas avvTovoy moujoee TH e€cufau Te Bapos, 
olov. 81) mowotow at tods totods bdaivovea Kat 

25 yap abras Tov oTHMova KaTaTEivoveL mpoodmToVaaL 
Tas Kadovpévas Aads. otTw yap Kal 7 TeV 

+] yeynpaxcow Z, A.-W.: ynpaoxovow vulg. 
1 dvetrae PZ, A.-W.: dvierm vulg. 

3 «at 4 Kapdia seclusit Btf. Xtamen vertit at tauri proprie 
sunt fortiorum nervorum et cordis. 

548 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vu. 

amount of air in movement, whereas in the latter the 
breath is under better control. In every animal, as 
age advances, this part which sets (the air) in move- 

_ ment becomes stronger, so that a change-over*® to 

the opposite is effected: high-pitched voices become 
deeper than they were, and deep-pitched ones higher. 
That is why bulls have higher-pitched voices than 
calves and cows. Now in all animals their strength 
lies in their sinews, and that actually is why animals 
in their prime are stronger than the others: young 
ones are less well articulated and less well supplied 
with sinews, and furthermore, their sinews have not 
yet become taut, whereas in ones that are aged their 
tautness has slackened off. Hence both young and 
old are weak and powerless so far as producing move- 
ment is concerned. Bulls however, being especially 
sinewy, have especially sinewy hearts; hence this 
part, by which they set the breath in movement, 
is taut, just like a sinewy string stretched tight. 
Bull’s hearts are shown to be sinewy by the fact 
that in some of them a bone? actually occurs, and 
bones seek the nature of sinew.° 

All animals when castrated change over to the 
female state, and as their sinewy strength is slackened 
at its source they emit a voice similar to that of 
females. This slackening may be illustrated in the 
following way. It is as though you were to stretch a 
cord and make it taut by hanging some weight on to 
it, just as women do who weave at the loom; they 
stretch the warp by hanging stone weights ¢ on to it. 

* For peraBadrew s * 5 ff. 

Scace ris #05 Bee A 17 ff., 768 a 15 ff. 

© This is a literal translation of the Greek. See 744 b 25, 

36 ff., and Introd. § 64. 
# Cf. 717 a 35. Lit., “* what are called ‘ laiai ’ (stones).” 

549 

787 b 

788 a 

30 

or 

10 

15 

ARISTOTLE te) 

Opxewy pvats TMpoonpryrar ‘mpos TOUS omeppare- 

Kos Topous, odTo. 5° ek Tis preBos is  apx7 

€K Tis Kapdias Tpos avT@ TA Kwoodvre chy pwvyp. 
d.udTrEp" Ka TOV OTEPHATUKaY TOpwv peTaBad- 
Advrey mpos my qAuktay ev H dy Svvavrae To 
omépua exKpivew, ouppetaBadAder Kal rotro To 
foptov. tovtov dé jeraBdddAovtos Kal 1 pwvr) 
petaBdAXrer, uaAdov pev rots dppeow, ovpPaiver 
S€ tadro Kai emt tdv Ondewv, adr adnAdrepov, 
Kal yiverat 6 Kadoboi Ties Tpayilew, oTav dy 
wparos 7 i) 7 Porn. peta Se TabTa Kkabiorarar els 
THY THs €muovons jAucias Bapéryra 7 up dfupwviay. 
dpaupoupeveny be TOV Opxewy dvierat a Tdous TOV 
TOpwv, WomTEp amd THs yopdns Kal Tod aTHmoVvoS 
adatpoupevov tod PBdpovs. Tovtov 8 avriepéevov 
Kal 7) apy?) 7) Kwotoa tiv dwviv exAdveTar Kara 
tov avrov Adyov. bia pev odv Tav’rnv Thy airiav 
Ta eKTELLVOHEVO peraBdAre eis To Onrv THV TE 
duviy Kat tiv adAnv popdyv, dia TO ovpBaivew 
avicoOar Tih aipxny e€ Hs brapyer TH owpate 7 
auvtovia, GAN ody wormep Ties droAapBdvovow 
avTovs Tovs Opxeis elvar ovvappa ToAA@Y apyOv- 
aAAa puxpat peTaoTdoets peydAwy atriat yivovrat, 
od Ov abrds, adn’ orav ovpBaivy apxny oUppeTa~ 
BddAew. at yap dpxat peyeber ovoat puxpal Th 
Suva pret peydrau eloiv: TodTo yap €oT. TO aipx7y 
elvat, TO adrny pev airiav elvat modAADv, TavTHs 
& dddo dvwbev pnber. 
1 Somep P: 86 vulg. 

* Cf. 776 b 17, 781 a 27 ff. 
550 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vu. 

This is the way in which the testes are attached to 
the seminal passages, which in their turn are attached 
to the blood-vessel which has its starting-point at the 
heart near the part which sets the voice in movement. 
And so, as the seminal passages undergo a change at 
the approach of the age when they can secrete semen, 
this part undergoes a simultaneous change. And as 
this changes, so too does the voice—to a greater 
extent in males, but the same happens with females 
as well, though the change there is less obvious ; and 
one result of this is that, as we say, the voice “ is 
breaking ” ° during the time that it is uneven. After 
that, it settles down into the deep or high pitch 
belonging to the age of life which is to succeed. If 
the testes are removed, the tautness of the passages 
is slackened, just as when the weight is removed from 
the cord or from the warp ; and as this slackens, the 
source (or principle) which sets the voice in movement 
is correspondingly loosened. This then is the cause 
on account of which castrated animals change over 
to the female condition both as regards the voice and 
the rest of their form : it is because the principle from 
which the tautness of the body is derived is slackened. 
The reason is not, as some people suppose, that the 
testes themselves are a ganglion of many principles. 
No ; small alterations are the causes of big ones, not 
in virtue of themselves, but when it happens that a 
principle changes at the same time.* The principles, 
though small in size, are great in power: that is what 
it means to be a principle—something which is itself 
a cause of many things, while there is nothing more 
ultimate which is the cause of it. 

® Lit., “ ‘ bleating like a goat’ as some people call it.” 
© Cf. 716 b 3, ete. 

551 

ARISTOTLE 

ae To* be dvoe Ta pev Tovadra ovvioraabax TOV 
lbw ore Bapiduva elvar, Ta 5 ogidwva,, 
oupBdrrera Kal 7 Deppdrns TOO TOTOU Kal 7) 
puxporns. To wev yap Oeppov mvedua Sid maxv- 
20 THTA ToLeEt Bapudwviay, To Oe puxpov dua Xe- 
MTOTHTA TovvavTiov. d7jAov de TobTo Kal emt Tov 
avrdy: of yap Jeppotépw TO TVEULATL Xpopevor, 
Kal TOLOUTOV mpotepevor ofov of aidlovres, apv- 
tépov advrAotow. Tis dé Tpaxupavias atttov, eat 
Tod Aciav elvar THv wry, Kal mdons THs Tovav’TNs 
25 avwyadias, TO TO pdopiov Kat TO Opyavov bu od 
pépeTrat 7% Pwr  Tpaxd 7) Aciov elvau 7 oAws 
opadov 7 dvespaNov (d7)Aov oe érav dyporns as 
bmdpxn TEpl TV aprnpiav 7) Tpaxdrns yevnTar tad 
twos mafous: tTéTe yap Kal a pwv7) yiverau av- 
wpados): tis 8 evxapipias,” dy padaKov 7) oKAnpov 
3077 TO Opyavovy To pev yap padaKov Svvarau 
TapuevecOar Kal mavTodamov yiveoBau, TO de 
oxAnpov od dvvarar. Kal TO pev padaKov Kat 
wy ov L péya Pbéyyecbar, 510 Kai o€d 
puxpov dSvvatat Kali péya Pbéyy ; 
kat Bapv- TapueveTar yap padiws Tod mvevparTos, 
Kal avTo yevopevov padiws péya Kat puKpov: 7 de 
orAnporns draplevTov. 
788 b Tlepi pev otv dwvis doa pa) TpoTepov ev Tots 
mepi aicbyjcews Subprorar Kal ev Tois Tept uyqs, 
TooatT <ipnobw. 
VII [lepi d€ dddvrwv, Stu ev ody Evds yap, ovde 
mdvta Tod avtod evexev Ta CHa Exovow, adda 
\ A \ A /, A \ \ ‘ > \ ‘ 
57a pev Sia THY Tpodyy, TA dé Kal Tmpos GAK}V Kat 
1 +@ Aldus: vod Bekker, per typothetae errorem, ut videtur. 
2 <xal tis axayibias> Bonitz. 
@ P.A. 655 b 8 ff, 661 b 1 ff. 

552 

- 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vit.—vin. 

_ The heat and cold of their place of habitation is 
another factor contributing to the fact that the 
natural construction of some animals is such that the 
have deep voices, and of others, that they have hi h 
voices. Breath that is hot produces deepness (heavi- 
ness) of voice, owing to its thickness ; breath that is 
cold produces the opposite result, owing to its thin- 
ness. This is plain in the case of musical pipes as 
well: people who blow comparatively hot breath 
into the pipe—.e., if they breathe it out as though 
they were saying “ Ah! ’—play a deeper note. The 
reason for roughness and smoothness of voice and all 
unevenness of that sort is that the part or organ 
through which the voice travels is rough, or smooth, 
or, to put it generally, is even or uneven. This is 
apparent when there is any fluid about in the trachea, 
or if there is any roughness due to an affection: in 
such circumstances the voice becomes uneven too. 
Flexibility depends upon whether the organ is soft or 
hard, since anything that is soft can be controlled and 
made to assume all sorts of shapes, whereas anything 
_hard cannot. Thus this organ if it is soft can utter 
a small sound or a large one, and therefore a high 
one or a deep one as well, because it controls the 
breath easily, as it easily becomes large or small itself. 
Hardness on the other hand cannot (so) be controlled. 
This will be a sufficient account of those points 
concerning the voice which we have not already 
settled in the treatises Of Sensation and Of the Soul. 
We have already said,* on the subject of the VIII 
teeth, that their existence is not for one purpose Tet 
only, nor do they exist for the same purpose in all 
animals : some have teeth on account of nourish- 
ment, some for self-defence and (some) for rational 

553 

788 b 

ARISTOTLE. 

mpos TOV eV TH puri Aoyor, eipnrat mporepov: dude 
8 ot pev mpoodtot yivovras TMpOTEpov ob dé oppor 
Borepov, Kal oOTOL [LEV ODK exTinTovaly exeivor 8 
exninrovar Kat dvovrar méAw, Tois Tepl yevéecews 
Adyous THY atriay ovyyevi det vopilew, vat 

10 KipnKe pev obv rept avTav Kal. Anpoxpitos, od 
Karas 8 eipnkev. od yap emi mavtwv oxeisdpevos 

/, / \ > 7 ‘ ‘ 52 / : 
Kabodov Aéyet Thy atria. pyar yap eK7imrew 
prev dia TO m™po Bpas yivecbat Tots Caous: aKpa- 
Covrwy yap ws elzretv pveoBas kaTd ye vow. 
Tod dS€ mpo wpas yiveodau TO Ondrdlew. airuér au. 
15 xairou OndAdler ye Kai bs, odK éxBdArer dé Tods 
> / ” \ \ /, / A 
ddovtas: ete Sé€ Ta KapyapddovTa OAnrAdler pev 
7 b] >? / > ” > ~ \ \ 
mavra, odK eKBddAer 8 evia adtadv mAjv Tods 
KuvddovTas, olov ot A€ovTes. ToOTO bev OdV HapTE 
/ / > / A ~ SLs 8 
KabdAov Aéywv, od oKedpevos TO GvpPatvorv emt 
mavtwv. Set S€ TobTo Toveiy: avayKn yap TOV 
/ / / ‘ / > ‘ A 
20 A€yovra KaldAov tu Aéyew TEept mavTwv. Emel OE 
\ , ¢ , ? @ fon ei , 
tiv vow tbroriéucba, e& dv dpdpmev brotWe- 
pevot, oT €AXeizovaay ovTe dtavov odbfev moLod- 
cav TV evdexouevwv mEpl EKacToV, avdyen, de 
Tois peAXovor Aap Baveu Tpodnyy pera TP Too 
yddarros amoAavow exew opyava mpos 77 €p- 
25 yaciav Ths tTpodys—el odv ouveBawev, ws Eekeivos 
A€yer, ampos Bnv, eveAeutev av 4 vos Tov 
evoexouevwy avTh Te Tovey, Kal TO THS PvdEews 

« This is repeated from H.A. 501 b-4, but it is incorrect. 
> Lit., ‘‘ which are saw-toothed.” See P.A. 661 b 19. 
‘Also stated at H.A.579 b 11. Other animals’ habits in 
iaaaitcnedding are noticed at H.A. 501 b 1 ff., 575 a 5. 

554 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vin. 

speech. But why are the front teeth formed first 
and the molars afterwards ?. And why are the molars 
not. shed, whereas the front teeth are, and grow 
again? We must take it to be appropriate to 
examine the cause of these things in a treatise on™ 
Generation. 

Now Democritus has treated of these matters, but 
his treatment is not correct, because he assigns a 
cause to apply generally although he has not under- 
taken an exhaustive invéstigation of the facts: He 
says that the reason why animals shed their teeth is 
that they are formed prematurely, since it is when 
animals are in their prime or thereabouts that they 
grow their teeth according to nature. Suckling is the 
cause he names for their being formed prematurely. 
Still, the pig suckles, yet does not shed its teeth ¢ ; 
and so do all the animals with sharp interfitting 
teeth, but some of them (e.g., the lion °) do not shed 
any teeth except the canine ones. Democritus, then, 
made this mistake because he made a general state- 
ment without investigating the facts in all cases ; 
but this is precisely what we ought to do, because 
whenever anyone makes a general statement it must 
apply to all cases. Now the assumption we make— 
and it is an assumption founded upon what we observe 
—is that Nature neither defaults nor does anything 
idly in respect of the things that are possible in every 
case ; and further, if an animal is going to get any 
nourishment after the period of its suckling is over, 
it must of necessity possess instruments with which 
to deal with its nourishment. So that if this took 
place, as Democritus says, about the time of maturity, 
Nature would be defaulting in one of the things which 
it is possible for her to do, and we should have Nature 

555 

788 b 

789 a 

ARISTOTLE )) 5 619) 

Epyov eylyveT av rapa diow. To yap. Bia Tapa 
vow, Bia dé pou _oupPaivery Thy yéveow TeV 
oddvrwy. OTL pev odv TObT’ ovK adn Bes, one 
eK ToUTWY Kal ToLOVTwWY Mov. 

Pivovrat dé _TpoTepov otro. TOV mAaréwy T™p@Tov 
bev ort Kal TO €pyov TO TOUTWwY TpoTEpoy. (mpérepov 
yap €oTt TOO Acdvau TO SueAciv, elat 5° exetvou pev 
emit TH Aeaivew, odror 8 emi. tH Siarpetv), ere!” 
6Tt TO EAaTToV, Kav dpa SpunbH, Oarrov yivecBar 
mépuxe Tod peilovos. etal 8’ €datrous obra. TH 
peyeDer TOV youpiov, T® TO ooTodv THs ata- 
yovos exel juev mrard elvat, mpos be TO orouare 
orevov. €K pLev oby TOO peiLovos Thelen avayKatov 
emippetv Tpodyv, ex S€ TOO oTevwrépov eAdtTw.” 

To de OnAdlew adro pev odfev cupBardAerar, 7) 

5 dé Tob ydAaktos Oepuotns trove? Oarrov BAaoTavew 

Tovs oddvTas. onuetov 8 Ott Kal adtav Ttav 
Onralovrwy ta Oepporépw yddakre ypwpeva TOV 
/ > ~ a > \ A : A 
madiwv ddovrodvet Oarrov: adb&nriKov yap TO 
Oeppov. 
’"Exzrimrovoy S€ yevduevor tod pev® BeAtiovos 

10 xapw, OTt TAXD apPrAdvverau' TO o€v- det ody éTépous 

t \ 1» a \ oi > 
diadéyeoOar mpos TO Epyov. Tay de mAaTéwv ovK 
” > 4 ~ > \ A , 4 / 
éotw apPaAvrns, adda TO xpovw TpiBdpevor Acai- 

iid ~ 

vovrat ovov. €€ avayKns 8° éxmimrovow, ott TOV 
~ ~ ~ ¢ 

prev ev mAateia TH ovaydve Kal ioyup@ ooT@ at 

17 76 Platt: kat 7@ ro coni. A.-W. (xai 7é 7d Paris. © 

Suppl. Gr. 333%) : : kat To vulg, 
S. SiC Platt : : ex be TOO. éAdrrovos orevewTépay vulg. 

A a 
3 yevopevor Tod pev| y’ Evor ToUTwy Tod Z: y? enor prev Tod 

1) 
556 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vin. 

working contrary to Nature * (because he says that 
the formation of the teeth is brought about by force, 
and “ by force” means “contrary to Nature”). So 
then it is apparent, both from these considerations 
and others like them, that this view is untrue. 

The teeth of which we are speaking are formed 

earlier than the flat teeth (1) because the work they 
have to perform comes earlier: breaking up (which 
is the purpose of these teeth) comes before grinding 
(which is the business of the flat ones) ; (2) because 
a smaller thing naturally forms more quickly than a 
larger one, even if they both start off together, and 
these teeth are smaller in size than the molars, 
because the jawbone at that point is flat, whereas it 
is narrow by the mouth ; and, of necessity, a larger 
amount of nourishment will flow out from the larger 
part, and a smaller amount from the narrower.” 
_ Suckling, in itself, contributes nothing to the: 
formation of the teeth, though the warmth of the 
milk makes them come through more quickly. A 
proof of this is that within the actual class of those 
which suckle, those. young ones which get hotter 
milk grow their teeth quicker, because that which is 
hot tends to promote growth. 

After having been formed, these teeth are shed 
(a) for the sake of the better, the reason being that 
anything sharp quickly gets blunted, and so a fresh 
relay of teeth is needed to carry on the work. (The 
flat ones, on the other hand, cannot get blunted ; 
they only get worn down in the course of time by 
friction.) They are shed also (6) as a result of necessity, 
because, whereas the roots of the grinders are situ- 
ated in the wide part of the jaw and upon good strong 

* But see Introd. § 14. > i.e, orm the teeth. 
557 

ARISTOTLE © | 

789 a 
pie. eloi, THv 5€ tpocbiwy ev den, 51d dobevels 

15 kal edicivytor. dvovras S¢ mdAw, Sr ev duoperey 
ETL T@ COTA 7) €KBoA} yiveras Kat Ete Wpas ovens 
yiveobat oddvras. tovrov bé te ott Kal ot 
mAarets acne ek mroAby xpevor’ ot yap TeAevrHtoE 
avaréAAovat TEpY Ta €lKooW EM éviois 8° 715y Kai 
yupdonequos yeyevnvrat ot scat: rath es 

20 TO 7roAAny eivat apg © év TH edpvywpia Tod dato. 

789b Oo de TPSoReoR dud THY hearts soe AapBdver 
tédos, Kal od yiverat wepitnine ev whip és dW 

eis THY ab—now avadioxera % Tpodi TIV olketav. 

, \ \ eo > < / iv pis’ 9m 

Anpoxpitos b€ TO od eveka ape Aéyew, mavTa 

> / > > / ~ , A 

avdyer eis avayKny ols xpirae 7 pvdous, odor pev 

5 TolovToLs, ov pv GAN Evexd Twos odcL, KaL TOD 

Vier , , oe , ; < 
mept Exaotov PeATiovos ydpw. wore yiveoBar pev 
> \ 7 ud ‘ > / > > > \ 
ov0ev KwAver otTw Kal eéxminrew, aAX od ba 
~ > \ \ \ / ~ > e ~ 
ratra, adda dua to rédos: Tabra 8 ws KwotvTa 

1» ge ” ” F505i8 \ \ ai 
Kal Opyava kal ws bAn aria, éemel Kal TO TO 
, > / ‘\ A > ‘ e > 4, 
mvevpat. epyaleabar Ta TroAdka EiKos Ws opyave* 
tag ah \ \ 
10 oiov yap eva moddypyoTa.€oT. THY TEpt Tas 
TeXvaS, asia ev *H xipce eee  odvpa Kal 6 
dkpmwv, OUTWS KaL TO che in e€v Tots aioe ouv- 
cot@ow. dporov 8 €ouxe TO A€yew Ta airia €€ 

@ ** The ‘ for the sake of which.’ ” 
> See Introd. § 6. 
© i.e, “of necessity,” a result of mere mechanical causation. 
4 Cf. above, 741 b 37, 742 a 16, and App. B §§ 7 ff. 

558 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vi. 

bone, those of the front teeth are in a thin part, and 
in consequence the teeth are weak and can easily be 
removed. They grow a second time, because they 
are shed while the bone is still growing and while 
the age for growing teeth is still going on. A proof 
of this is that even the flat teeth take a long time 
_ growing: the last of them are cut at about twenty 
years of age; in fact, some people have been quite 
aged before their last teeth finished growing. The 
reason for this is that there is a great deal of nourish- 
ment in the wide part of the bones. The front part, 
however, quickly reaches its completion owing to its 
thinness, and no residue finds a place in it ; instead 
of that, the nourishment is consumed to supply that 
part’s own growth. 

Democritus, however, omitted to mention the 
Final Cause,* and so all the things which Nature 
employs he refers to necessity. It is of course true 
that they are determined by necessity, but at the 
same time they are for the sake of some purpose, 
some Final Cause, and for the sake of that which is 
better in each case.” And so there is nothing to 
prevent the teeth being formed and being shed in 
the way he says © ; but it is not on that account that 
it happens, but on account of the Final Cause, the 
End; those other factors are causes gua causing 
movement, gua instruments, and qua material, 
since in fact it is probable that Nature makes the 
majority of her productions by means of pneuma4 
used as an instrument. Pneuma serves many uses 
in the things constructed by Nature, just as certain 
objects do in the arts and crafts, e.g., the hammer 
and anvil of the smith. But to allege that the 
causes are of the necessary type is on a par with 

559 

Necessity 
and the 
Final Cause. 

ARISTOTLE > 

ALS 

789 b a, ar MG - 
avayKns Kav et tis dia TO payaiptov olotTo TO 

vdwp erent g ope Tots a at faa C3 
15 od dia TO Byaivery od Eveka TO HOXSEEMS STL, 
~~ pev ody dddvrwv, didTt of pev exmimrovar 

iv” 

: 

Kal yivovtra mdAw, oi 8 ov, Kat dAws Sud Tw 

aitiay yivovrat, elpntat. elpnrar dé Kal mepl wend 
20 ddwy T&v Kata Ta popLa nabnpdrov, éoa ree 

aba ou aiver MM évexd Tov add’ e& avdynns Kat 

dua Tv airiay THY KWHTUKY. (Shp ar 

560 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, V. vit. 

supposing that when water has been drawn off from 
a dropsical patient the reason for which it has been 
done is the lancet, and not the patient’s health, for 
the sake of which the lancet made the incision. 

We have now dealt with the subject of the teeth, 
and we haye stated why some of them are shed and 
grow a second time and why some of them do not, 
and generally, to what cause their being formed is 
due. We have also dealt with the other conditions 
which affect the parts of the body, conditions which 
occur not for the sake of any Final Cause but of 
necessity and on account of the Motive Cause. 

561 

ARISTOTLE ek 

AppITionaL Notes ON THE TEXT 
I add here four textual annotations for which there was 
no room in the body of the work. 

I. 719a2ff. Thess. and editions. have various readings, 
and several proposals have been made for emendation. 

Bekker has: —_rov adrov Tpomov Ta mAcioTa ylyverat OvTEep & 
Tots Opmow oe SYZ): xaraBaiver yap 
KaTw, Kal t. 

Zs ease lta ‘évnep . . . kal KaraBaiver 
KaTW . : 

P; _ yeyvepevor ovrep .. . KaTaPaiver Karo . 

S: . ylyverar Womrep ... ". karaBalvet KaTW... 

(Hence. Y must, be the authority for yap.) 

Aldus : ylyverat OvTep . - dpriBiors xaraBatver KaTW . 
A.-W. coni.: (i TeAciwots) yiverat ies év Tots opvictv tia 
@a) karaBaiver KdTw .. 

Susemihl coni.: . . . dpmow (7 reAciwots: Ta i 8° @a) xaraBaiver 
KaTw. 

If loss of this sort is likely, which I doubt, a more probable 
emendation would be xaraBaiver yap xdtw {ra wa), Kat... 
But I suspect that the corruption is more serious, for Scot 
reads: et similiter multis ovis avium ; <et quedam animalia 
ovant interius, et exit ab eis animal parvum ; et cum pervenit 
tempus partus> descendunt <ova> ad partem inferiorem apud 
iuncturas et exit ab eis animal sicut accidit animalibus ge- 
nerantibus animalia ex prima creatione. The Greek original 
of the words in brackets has disappeared from our text: 

Il. 738 a 8 ORE | suspect that the original reading here was 
Tois mEpiTTmpacr Tois T axphoros (Kal Tots xpyoipots), and 
that the rest of our present text is part of a gloss, for 
Te. . . bypa cannot be construed, and the reference to bl 
seems to consider blood as a “ residue,’’ which is incorrect. 
If my suggestion is right, the gloss will have ousted the 
reference to useful residues from our text, and the reference to 
useless ones from Scot’s ultimate original, for Scot reads 
omnia ista habent membra recipiencia superfluitatem qua 
indigent (his regular equivalent for xpjoupos) sicut sanguis qui 
habet locum in venis ; ergo ipse vadit in ea sicut in vasa. 
Clearly, too, Scot incorporates more of the latter part of the 

562 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

gloss than the Greek text does, and the reference to vasa — 
(=dyyeta) leads me to think that the gloss was founded on 
a misunderstanding of the passage at P.A. 650 a 33 (q.v.). 
The blood-vessels are often described as dyyeia in P.A.; 
of. G.A. TA0 a 23. ?; . 

IL. 746 a 32. Here Bitterauf, following the suggestion of 
3ussemaker, proposes to insert (cai @wwv) after cai Adcwv on 
the strength of William’s and Scot’s versions. The latter 
reads in canibus et vulpibus et lupis et in genere quod dicitur 
ee comez (Buss. and Btf. give comex). This is supported 
y the fact that at 774 b 17 Scot translates ciwv dAvKos Bas 
canis et lupus et animal quod dicitur grece noz. (Such 
variation in the spelling of proper and other unusual names 
is not infrequent in Scot.) At 742 a9 @ds is not represented 
in Scot’s version. 
(According to A.-W., 9s, usually translated ‘‘ jackal,” is 
most probably the civet or genet: .see D. W. Thompson, 
H.A. 580 a 29, n.) 

V. 781.410 of yap mopo . . . 781 b 5 cvpBaivovaw. The 
main arguments against this passage being an original and 

genuine part of the text may be stated as follows : 

(1) The introductory yap introduces no real explanation or 
expansion of the preceding statement. The passage is in 
fact completely extraneous to the argument. 

(2) The reference to De sensu at 781 a 21 is incorrect, as 
A.-W. point out. There is no such clear statement in De 
sensu; at 439 a 1 the aic&yrjpiov of touch and taste is said 
to be apés 7H xapdia, but nothing is said to suggest that sight 
and smell have any further connexion beyond their connexion 
with the brain. At P.A. 656 a 29, on the other hand, there 
is a more exact reference to De sensu: ** The correct view, that 
the dpyy of the senses is the region around the heart, has 
airehdy | been defined in the treatise Of Sensation, where also 
I show why it is that two of the senses, touch and taste, are 
evidently (davepas) connected to the heart." Shortly before 
(656 a 20 ff.) Aristotle has stated that the brain is not the 
cause of any of the sensations ; it is avaic@yros. 

(3) The passage is concerned exclusively with that part of 
the mechanism of hearing which is internal, not with the 
superficial sense-organ, whereas the reason given for accuracy 
of hearing and smelling is concerned only with the super- 
ficial sense-organ (just as the similar argument for sight, 

563 

ARISTOTLE 
which is referred to, is concerned only with the eye itself 
and the skin on it). 

(4) The passage has nothing whatever to say about smell. 

(5) It concludes with a mere repetition of 781 a 18-20, to 
the effect that accuracy depends upon the purity of the organ 
and its membrane, ignoring the whole of the intervening 
discussion about the internal mechanism. _ F . 

(6) The reference to a place where the connate pneu 
causes “in some ” pulsation and “in others ”’ respiration an: 
inspiration is, as Platt points out, meaningless, for no animal 
respires unless it has a heart. 

The inference would appear to be that the passage, though 
probably of Aristotelian origin, has been corrupted, and that, 
so far as Book V is concerned, it began as a marginal annota- 
tion, intended to supply an account of the inner mechanism 
of sensation, etc., which would supplement the account of the 
mechanism of the superficial sense-organs of hearing and 
smell which no doubt originally stood here in the text. No 
such account, however, is there now ; and it seems reasonable 
to suppose that it has been ousted and supplanted by the 
passage which now stands there. ) 

To understand the background of the passage, the reader 
may find it useful to refer to the account of Aristotle’s theory 
of hearing in App. B §§ 29 ff., which I have compiled from 
various passages here and elsewhere in his works. I have 
suggested in the critical note some corrections, based on 
Scot’s Latin version, which may help to bring the text into 
agreement with Aristotle’s doctrine as ascertained from these 
other passages. ° 

For the sake of completeness, I give the remainder of 
Scot’s translation between the two passages already quoted 
in the app. crit.: |et] propter hoc addiscuntur res per (y.l. 
propter) sensum auditus, quoniam sicut sermo intrat per 
sensum auditus, ita exit per linguam |{et| per motum vocis. 
manifestum est ergo quod homo dicit (y.l. discit) quod audit. 
et cum homo gannit debilitatur auditus, quoniam principium 
instrumenti sensus istius est positum super membrum in quo 
est spiritus, et movetur cum eo quando spiritus movebitur 
instrumento in quo est. et hoc accidens accidit temporibus 
humide complexionis. 

The passage is discussed at considerable length by F. 
Susemihl, Rhein. Mus. XL (1885), 583 ff. 

564 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS 

Apprri0naL Nore ror II. 741 b 2, III. 762 b 24 ff. 

The first modern work on the breeding migration of the 
European eel (Anguilla vulgaris) is that of Grassi * and 
Calandruccio, who, following some previous work on 
the reproductive i pew made observations of eels in the 
Mediterranean, and showed that Leptocephalus, already 
known and described as a different animal, was the larval 
form of the eel. The whole subject has been fully worked 
out by Schmidt in recent years. The facts are these. 
During the time when eels live in fresh water, their repro- 
ductive organs do not reach maturity, as Aristotle pointed 
out; but after a number of years, which may vary from five 
to twenty, the body takes on a metallic sheen (“ silver eels”) 
and the fish set out on their migration to.their-breeding-places 
inthe deep waters between the West Indies and Bermudas. 
The eggs float in the sea, and the larvae are carried by the 
ocean currents eastwards across the Atlantic: upon arrival 
at the Continental shelf two and a half years later they meta- 
morphose into elvers, and these then move up into the 
estuaries and rivers of Europe, sometimes passing over damp 
grass to isolated pools. During the period of growth which 
follows, they are yellowish and greenish in colour (‘* yellow 
eels”). The old eels never return to fresh waters. The 
story (mentioned by Aristotle) of the development of eels out 
of horsehair worms was current until recent times. 

AppitronaL Nore ror III. 757 a 2 ff. 

Aristotle discusses the hyena both here and at H.A. VI. 
579 b 15 ff. 

An important piece of research on the spotted hyena 
recently carried out in Tanganyika Territory by L. Harrison 
Matthews * has established that externally the female of 

« G. B. Grassi, Proc. Roy. Soe. LX (1897), 260-271. : 
>’ J. Schmidt (of Copenhagen), The Breeding Places of the Eel, Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. (B) CCXI (1922), 179-208; see also id., Nature, CXI 
(1923), 51-54, C (1924), 12; and W. Heape, Emigration, Migration, 
and Nomadism, 1931. . 
© Reproduction in the S Hyena (Crocuta crocuta), in Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. (B) CCX XX (1939), 1-78. 
565 

The 
Common 
Eel. 

The Hyena. 

“I VARISTOTLEs AMMAD 

the spotted hyena closely resembles the male: it has a 
peniform clitoris, similar in form and position to the ] 
of the male, and scrotal pouches closely simulating those of 
the male. Indeed the male and non-parous female are 
indistinguishable externally. Matthews points out. ae 
Aristotle did not distinguish between spotted and. stri 
hyenas: the legend “relates to the spotted hyena, 
Aristotle’s refutation of it to the striped, e genital anatomy 
of which he correctly describes ’? (Matthews refers to the 
description in) H.A.). Of 103 specimens collected by 
Matthews, 63 were males; this is a lower percentage | than 
that given by the hunter with whom Aristotle discussed the 
subject: he found ten out of eleven were sonsenae but these may 
have been striped a en i gob atin 
, « TSM ‘ey 
Teyiustt || 

» et 

566 

APPENDIX A 

MOVEMENT IN THE UPPER COSMOS AND IN THE 
LOWER COSMOS ;: THE HEAVENLY BODIES; 
yéveors AND ¢fopa ; TIME, PERIODS, CYCLES 

(Supritement to Boox II, init. anv Boox IV, fin.) 

It will be seen that the terminology of the two passages above 
mentioned reappears in the following account, much of which 
is taken verbatim from the several passages to which reference 
is given. I have not thought it necessary to draw attention to 
all the parallels, as these will be obvious to the reader who has 

the passages of G.A. before him. 

(1) Met. A 1069 a 30 ff. Thereare three kinds of odoia: Three kinds 
{ (a) eternal (aédcos) ; beans 
(1) sensible (aio@n77) | (b) perishable (¢@aprés), ¢.g., 
| animals and plants ; 

(2) immutable (dxivyros). 

Immutable ovaia is the ovcia of the unmoved mover 
(see below, § 3) ; 

sensible and eternal ovcia belongs to the “‘ heaven” - 
and the heavenly bodies (the stars and planets, 
including the Sun and Moon) ; 

sensible and pefishable odaia belongs to the things of 
the sublunary world (Earth, Air, etc., and the 
organisms made out of them, animals, plants, etc.).* 

(2) De caelo, e.g., 268-269, 289 a, 300 a 20 ff., etc. There are Five 
five natural substances which compose the physica] elements. 
_ universe : 

Aither, whose nature it is to move eternally in a circle ; 
this is the substance out of which the whole of the 
Upper Cosmos is made, viz., the “ first heaven ”’ (the 
outermost shell or sphere) in which the stars are 

@ See also App. A § 18. 
567 

APPENDIX A 

fixed, and also the planetary “‘ heavens” together 
. with the planets themselves which they carry ;__ 

Fire, Air, Water and Earth, whose natural movement 
is rectilinear (¢.g., Air moves naturally outwards 
from the ceritre, Earth moves naturally towards the 
‘centre; hence they would if left to themselves @ 
arrange themselves in concentric strata, with Fire 
outermost, next to the innermost “‘ heaven’; after 
that Air, then Water, and Earth at the centre). 
These are the substances out of which all the Lower 

Cosmos, the sublunary world, is composed. — 
The (3) Met. A 1072 a, b. The ultimate source of all move- 

sate ment is the Unmoved Mover, which is pure, self-thin 

the gopd of | thought, or God ; and since the “ actuality ” of thought 
the First is life, we can say that {wi Kai aidw ovvexjs Kai didios 
Heaven. indpxe..T@ Oe. ‘This “ first principle’ causes meyement 

without itself being in movement ; it is therein analogous 
to objects of desire or of thought, which «wet od «wov- 

va; in fact, it xwet ws epwpevoy (it causes movement 
»y being an object of loye).° Upon this first principle 
the Heaven and Nature depend. What it first sets in 
movement is the mpdrov xwovpevorv, the primum mobile, 
viz., the “first heaven.”’ or outermost sphere ; and since 
this. movement is an unceasing movement, so the first 
heaven will be aiésos. This movement, then, is one 
and eternal; it is simple dopa, simple uniform circular 

movement, 
Movement (4) All other things beside the Unmoved Mover which pro- 
in the duce movement do so in virtue of being themselves 

Poet Se in movement (xwovpeva 7dA\a wet). ‘Thus the “first 
- ” “ * 

heaven communicates movement to the inner 

*‘ heavens,” the whole system of concentric spheres, 

which are in contact with each other ; and the movements 

-of these, although still continuous and eternal, are no 

longer uniform, because they are the resultants of more 
revolutions than one.? 

« As in fact they are not (see § 12; ef. § 9). Nor, according to 
Aristotle, are the elements occupying their ‘‘ proper’’ places when 
acting as the components of living bodies (De caelo II. 288 b 17 ff.). 

» Cf. App. B § 1. 

¢ Cf. Dante, Paradiso, vers. ult., l’ amor che move il sole e Il’ altre stelle. 

¢ Tt is not necessary here to give details of the system of spheres as 
worked out by Aristotle, based on the mathematical theories of Eudoxus 
and Callippus. 

568 

APPENDIX A 

(5) In the “ region about the centre,” 7.¢., the Lower Cosmos 
or 

(6) 

(7) 

sublunary world, there is no circular movement at all 

-as such. The form in which movement is found here is 

in the “ movements,” i.¢., transformations of the four 
sublunary “ simple ’’ bodies, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and 

Meteor. 1. 339 a 28. Weshould regard Fire, Earth, etc., 
as the “* material *’ causes of phenomena in the sublunary 
world ; but the cause in the sense of the origin of move- 
ment (the “ motive ” cause) is to be found in the dynamis 
of the eternally moving bodies.’ 

Ibid. 340 b, 341 a. The “ first element” (alias the 
“ fifth element,’’ viz., aither; see 737 a 4, n.) and the 

Movement 
in the 
Lower 
Cosmos. 

The 

** Causes 

of things in 
the Lower 
Cosmos. 

The 
heavenly 

bodies in it revolve in a circle, and as they do so, that °% 

portion of the Lower Cosmos which is next to the aither 
gets inflamed and produces heat. Thus, although not 
made of Fire, and although not themselves hot, the 
heavenly bodies produce heat by their mere movement. 
Aristotle explains this more fully at De caelo I. 289 a 29, 
when he says that the heat and light which proceed from 
them are produced by the friction set up in the Air by 
their dopa (cf. § 9 fin. below). The Sun, which is con- 
sidered to be the hottest of them all, is really white 
(Aevxés), not fiery in colour. The Sun’s ¢opa is sufficient 
to produce warmth and heat: it is fast enough and near 
enough, whereas the dopa of the stars though fast is 
distant, and the Moon’s though near is slow (ef. De caelo 
II. 289 a 20-34). 

(8) Ibid. 346 b, 359 b. Rain and winds are explained as 

being caused by the Sun’s approaching and receding in 
its dopa. When it approaches it draws up the moist 
exhalation ; when it retires this vapour cools and congeals 
again into water ; hence there is more rain during winter 
and during the night. It also draws up the dry exhala- 
tion, and this is the substance which makes the winds. 

bodies ; 
heat. 

Rain and 
winds, — 

(9) It is pointed out in De caelo II. 286 b 2 that in order to Function 

@ See Introd. §§ 47 ff., «ivynocs. 
>’ Quoted in Greek at 777 b 31, n. 

569 

of the other 

APPENDIX A 

heavenly account for the transformations of the four “‘ elements ” 
dopai in Fire Air Water Earth, i.¢., for the yéveous of them ou 

causing —_ of one another, some additional dopé or dopai beside that 
(2) perverts’; of the *‘ Whole” (or the apdrov xwotpevor) is ired : 
if this were the only dopa, no transformation would take 

place aa the te prises oar ees otiee on otal ri 
And with regard to the yéveas iving things, Aris- 
totle describes in other treatises more stakcitapeepaael ae 
fuller detail than he does in G.A. the important part 
ps ed by these other dopai (i.¢., those of the heavenly 
odies) Thus in Phys. II. 194 b 13 we read dv@pwzos 
dOpwrov yew kai HAcos*; and at Met. A 1071 a 13 ff. 
the “‘ causes ’’ of a man are listed as (a) the ‘* elements,” 
viz., (i) his matter (Fire and Earth), and (ii) his own form 
(iStov efSos); also (6) something external, viz., his father ; 
and besides these (c) the Sun and the circle of the ecliptic 
(6 Aogés xvKAos)—and these last stand to him neither as 
matter, nor as form, nor as privation, nor as being identi- 
cal with him in form, but as xwodvra, i.¢., ‘‘ efficient” or 
‘“* motive ” causes (ef. §§ 5 and 6 above). | Cf. also G.A. 
II. 737 a 3: the heat of the Sun and the heat of animals 
as contained in semen is able to cause generation, whereas 

Fire cannot. 
(b) yeveors (10) The whole question of yéveors and Popa is more full 

and $8opa. discussed at the end of the treatise G. & C. (II. chh. 10 
and 11), where the meaning of the statements about 
the Sun and the ecliptic is explained. Here Aristotle 
states that yéveots is continuous because the circular 
revolution of the ‘‘ first heaven” is eternal (4 xara ri 
dopav Kivnars is didios); and this dopa produces yéveois 
by bringing 76 yervnrixdy (the generative agent, viz., the 
Sun) nearer and by taking it further away. This dopa 
however is a single movement (as we saw above, § 3), and 
therefore will only explain yéveo.s ; it will not also ex- 

a This would not, however, have sounded so strange to a Greek ; 
cf. G.A. 716 a 17 ovpavoy 62 Kai HALoy . . . ws yevv@yTas Kal Tarépas mpoo- 
ayopevovory.—lt is a statement which caught the fancy of the Middle 
Ages, and is quoted by Dante (from the Latin translation of Physies 11) 
in his De monarchia 1. 9 init. ; cf. Paradiso XXII. 116 quegli ch’ é padre 
d@’ ogni mortal vita, 

» Aristotle regularly takes these two as the elements par excellence, 
standing for all four (see De caelo III. 298 a 29, 298 b 8)—because Fire 
“has not heaviness ’’ and Earth ‘ has not lightness ’’ (IV. 311 b 27). 
Cf. App. B §§ 20, 22, 23, 

570 

APPENDIX A 

plain ¢fopd. Thus yéveors-and-g6opa is to be explained 
not as being due to the primary ¢opd (i.¢., the dopa of 
the “* first heaven °’), but as being due to the dopa Kara 
tov Aokov K¥xAov—the movement along the circle of the 
ecliptic, which is tilted. This, like the other, possesses 

- continuity ; but also it is double, not single. Thus we 

(11) 

(12) 

may say that the continuity is caused by the dopa of 
“the Whole” (i.e., the “ first heaven ’’; the primary 
dopa), while the alternation is produced by the inclina- 
tion of the ecliptic, which makes the Sun alternately 
ap roach and retreat. When the Sun approaches it 
cause yéveors, when it retreats it will cause $8opa. 
ah in consequence of this, natural (xara dvaw) yéeveas 
and ¢8opd occupy equal times for their accomplishment. 
Hence both the times and the lives of all several things = 
have a“* number” and by that number they are delimited 
-. .and every life and time is measured by a period . 
Sor some, this period is the year ; for others, the Debio. 
which is the measure, is greater, for others, ‘smaller (dco 
Kal of xpdvor Kai of Bioe | éxaoTwv apcBov Exovor Kat Toure 
Siopilovra: . . . Kal mas Bios «ai xpdvos BeTpeirat 
Teprody . .* Tots bev yap o eviautos, Tots dé pei- 
fev, trois 5€ hers 7 meptodds € ne 76 pérpov). He then 
repeats that natural yéveois and ¢dfopa occupy an equal 
time ; but, he adds, in point of fact things often d@eipera 
ia a shorter time than this; for since matter is uneven 
avaéparos; cf. his statement in G.A. 1V jin. about its 
tie ai innest? *), the yeréces of things are uneven 
too, some being quicker and some slower than they 
should be; and as a result of this the d@opa of other 
things is affected, because the yéveors of one set of things 
is the ¢@opa of another. (See also App. B §§ 7-11.) 
Tevecis-and-¢@opa is continuous, and shall never fail. 
The reason is that Nature always strives after 7d BéArwyv, 
and being is better than not-being; but since being 
cannot be possessed by all things because they are too 
far away from the dpy7 (i.¢., from God, the Unmoved 
Mover), God “ filled in ne the Whole i in the manner that 

‘remained open, viz., by making yéveais continuous; that 

was the way to ensure that as far as possible ‘there 
should be an unbroken chain of “ being * throughout 
the universe, for the next best thing to “* being ” is that 

571 

ahr 

and d@opa 
governed 
by 

** periods.” 

Continuous 
yeveots a 
second-best 
to eternal 
being. 

APPENDIX A - : 

yéveots Should be continually going on (76 yiveoBa det 
Thy yéveow); and the cause of this is the circular dopa ; 
for this is the only continuous form of movement. Hence 
also the things which get transformed into each other 
(viz., the “simple bodies,” such as Water, Air, Fire) 
imitate the circular dopad: Water is transformed into 
Air, Air into Fire, Fire into Water, and we say that 
their yéveors has come round a full “ cirele.”” (So, too, 
rectilinear ¢opd is continuous in virtue of its imitating 
circular dopa.) And this also provides a solution of the 
problem, Why is it that the “ simple bodies,” in spite 
of their natural tendency to make each for its own 
proper place in the universe, have not during the enor- 
mous stretches of time which have passed become 
separated out each into its own proper place, into con- 
centric layers (see § 2)? ~The reason is that they are 
continually being transformed to and fro one into the 
other, and the cause of their transformations is the dopa 
—i.¢., the double dopa. 
Measure- (13) Phys. [V. 219 b 3 ff. We cognize movement by means 

ment of of some body which is in movement; so too we cognize 
SPR asks gopd by means of some body which is depduevov: that 
meat of is how we cognize the “‘ before-and-after ” factor in 

time. movement, for it is the ‘‘now”’ (i.¢., the moment at 

which the body is observed to be at some particular 
point in its course) which is ‘‘ most cognizable.”” And 
just as dopa and the depouevov are thus closely allied, so 
too are the dpuOuds * of the dopa and the dpiOyos of the 
depopevov. Now time is the dpiOuds of the dopa. We 
see then that time is not movement, but it is “‘ the as 

of movement whereby movement has an dpiOyds,”’ i.¢., 
the aspect of movement whereby movement can be 
numerated or counted (4 dpuOucv exer % Kivnos): time 
is that which is counted, not that by which we count 
(70. dpBpovpevor, not @ apiOuoduev); time is an dpiOpds 
which is counted, not an dpi0uos which we use as a 
means for counting (220 b 8). Time is the dpiOuds of 
continuous movement generally (223 b1; ef. G. & C. II. 
337 a 23), not of any movement in particular ; neverthe- 
less, what we usually mean by time, and what really 

« This meaning of api6uds is of course quite distinct from that in 
§§ 15-17 below. ; 

572 

APPENDIX A 

- has the best claim to the name, is the dpiBuds of the 

_circular movement(7 «ixAw dopa), because the dpifuds of 

this even, uniform, circular revolution is “‘ most cogniz- 

_ able’ (223 b). And as everything is measured by some 
s 

(14) 

rd which is cognate to it (¢.g., horses are measured 
or counted by the unit “ a horse,”’ see 220 b and 223 b), 
so time is measured by “ a time,” viz., by a determinate 

length of time ; and the time taken by the sphere of the 

universe to revolve is the “ measure” par excellence: 

_all other movements are measured by that movement, 

and time too is measured by that movement (ef. De 
caelo 11. 287 a 23 ff., Phys. VIII. 265 b 8 ff.). Hence 
human affairs and all other things which have a natural 
movement and yéveois and dfopa are spoken of as bein 
a “cycle”: they are all discriminated by time, an 

_ their beginning and their end occur as it were according 

to some “period ’’ (223 b). And further;-since a move- 
ment may be the same over and over again, so too may 
time, ¢.g., year, spring, autumn (220 b 12). 

G. & C. 11. 338 a1 ff. Ifa thing’s “ being ”’ is “‘ neces- 
sary” (i.¢., absolutely necessary ; see Introd. §§ 7-9), 
then it is eternal (aid.os); and if it is eternal, then its 
“being” is “‘ necessary.“ And also, if a thing’s yéve- 
aus is “‘ necessary,” then its yéveors is eternal; and if 
its yéveous is eternal, ‘‘ necessary.”” Thus, if a thing’s 
yeveats is absolutely, not conditionally, *‘ necessary,” its 
yéveoits must of necessity be cyclical and return upon 
itself (dvaxuxAety Kai dvaxaprrev). [Proof of this.— 
Tears must be either limited or not limited. We agree 
it not limited. If it is not limited, it must be either 
rectilinear or cyclical. If it is to be eternal, it cannot be 
rectilinear ; hence it must be cyclical.] Thus it is in 
circular movement and in Pe yeveots that we find 
absolute necessity. This fits in with the doctrine (proved 
on other and independent grounds) that circular move- 
ment (i.¢., the movement of the Heavens) is eternal ; for 
it is the movements which belong to this eternal move- 
ment, and the movements which are caused by it, which 
yivovra: and <ioty “‘ of necessity.” That which is moving 
round in a circle is always setting other things in move- 
ment, so that their movement too must be circular. 

« Eternal being and eternal yéveors are mentioned at G.A. 742 b 27, 31. 

573 

Teveors 
cyclical. 

Tévecis 
cyclical in 
either of 
two modes. 

(15) 

(16) 

574 

APPENDIX A 

Thus the upper dopa is a circular movement, hence the 
Sun’s is too, hence the seasons yivovra cyclically, hence 
Ta b70 tovUrTwr (ef. G.A. TV. 777 b 35—778 a 2) yivovra 
cyclically. Thus Water > Air Water ; cloud entails 
rain, rain entails cloud. 

Ibid. So far, so good. Why then do not men and 
animals apparently show this cyclical movement ? Why 
do they not return upon themselves, so that the same 
individual yiverat a second time ? In other words, why 
is it not ‘“‘ necessary ” that you should yivecOa if your 
father does, although it is necessary that if you do, he 
should? This looks like rectilinear, not cyaliel yeveats. 
Well, we must make a distinction and say that there are 
two ways in which things “ return upon themselves ” : 
some (a) do it numerically (dpiOud, i.e. the individual is 
numerically identical) ; others (6) do it specifically only 
(cideu pdvor, i.¢., the specific form, not the individual, is 
identical). The difference depends upon the character 
of the ovoia (see § 1) which is experiencing the “* move- 
ment”: if (a) their ovcia is ‘‘ imperishable,” then 
obviously they will be the same dpiOud as well as <idec ; 
if (b) their odoia is “‘ perishable,” then they recur «dex 

‘only, not dp.8ue. That is why when Water yivera: from 

Air, and Air from Water, it is the same ee only, 
not dpidud. Nothing, in fact, whose ovoia yiverat, 1.é., 
nothing whose ovoia is subject to yéveors and ¢6opa, 
whose ovoia is such that it admits of not-being, can 
remain same and identical apidud. 

The meaning of the last preceding paragraph will be 
clearer when we recall which are the things whose otcia 
is ‘“‘ imperishable,” not subject to yéveous and ¢Oopa. — 
They are the stars and planets. Their odoia is free from 
all forms of change except circular movement; hence 
each persists as an eternally identical individual; its 
cycle is just its cyclical movement, dopd. As against 
these eternal ovoia., we have such things as Air and 
Water, men and animals, whose ovo/a is liable to not- 
being, is ‘‘ perishable.’’ At first sight, says Aristotle, 
there seems to be a difference between Air and Water 
on the one hand and men and animals on the other. 
The ‘‘ cycle ’’ in the case of the former is obvious: rain 
is followed by cloud, cloud by rain, rain by cloud, con- 
tinually ; but it is not so obvious in the case of men and 

APPENDIX A 

animals. Although rain entails cloud, and cloud rain, 
in a continuous cycle, your father’s yéveors does not 
_  hecessarily entail yours, though yours entails his. But 
fundamentally the situation is the same in both cases, 
for (a) yéveots and dOopa shall never fail (§§ 12 and 14); 
there must always be a yévos of men, animals and plants 
(G.A. II), and the race will be continued even if one 
particular individual does not reproduce itself (this at 
any rate seems to be implied by Aristotle); (4) in 
neither case is there persistent identity of the individual : 
just as you are different dp:@u@ from your grandfather, 
so is the rain which falls to-day different dpi@u4 from 
the rain which fell yesterday or last year. 
a7) De anima Il. 415 a 25 ff. Reproduction is one of the Péveas by 
functions of Openrexy duyy (nutritive Soul; see Introd. reprodue- 
§§ 41 ff.); and the “ most natural” function of all living — of 
things is to produce another one like themselves “ so attaining 
that they may partake in the eternal and divine i in the pear 
way that they can” (iva 70d dei kai. tod Oeiov peréxwow Fj 
dvvavrat), since all things strive after this, and for the 
sake of this they do all that they do xara dvcw. But 
they are unable to partake in the eternal and divine by ‘ 
uninterrupted continuance (ovveyeig), because no thing 
_ that is ibaa may persist as one and the same eae 
hence they partake in it each in the way in which they 
can do so, some more, some less; and so the thing 
i not as itself but as something like itself (od« 
avo aAX’ oiov avtd)—i.¢,, as One, not a One but cider. 
(is) Aristotle states more than once that * matter *” for The 
“ perishable ”” pine is to duvatov doa kai pm elvar. “matter” 
FE.g., (1) in G. & C, Il, 335 a 24 ff. For things which of $@apra. 
are elvat Kal 47) elvas dward, the “ material cause’ 
(airvov as ody) is to duvarov elva Kai py elvar, which= 
70 yernrov Kai pbaprov. (This is twice stated.) Hence, 
the field in which yeveots and dGopa take place must 
be To Suvarov elvar Kai pa. eva: that, then, is their 
*“‘ material” cause. Their “ final * cause is their figure 
or “ form’’; and there is a third cause or dpyy, viz., 
the “ motive *’ cause. (2) In Met. Z 1032 a 15 ff. we 
read that ovoia par excellence, the things which “ we 
consider to have the fullest title to be called oteia,”’ are 
animals and plants. And all dvce yeyvopeva (as well, 

575 

APPENDIX B 

of course, as all réyvn yeyvdpeva) have ‘ matter,” for 
each of them is duvarey eivar Kai ut) eva, and this is the 
“* matter ’’ which is in each of them. 

- 

~ 
* 

APPENDIX B 
Lipdvrov Ivevpo. 

I. THE FUNCTION OF S¥udurov Tvedua IN GIVING — 
PHYSICAL EFFECT TO THE MOVEMENT OF — 

Opexriki Puxy. La 
The move- (1) M.A. 700 b 15 ff., De anima III. 433 b 11 ff. All the 
ment of various stimuli (such as intellect, imagination, purpose, 

gpnimals is wish, appetite, sensation) which “ move ” animals are 
by an un- reducible to mind and desire (voids and dpegis) ; hence the 
moved mp@rov xwodv of animals is the object of intellect and 

mover. the object of desire (ro dpexrov xal 7d Scavonrdv). And 
the mpa@rov kwodv kivet od Kivotpevor, in virtue of being 
apprehended in thought or imagination: it is, in fact, 
70 mpaxrov ayabdy, the good which can be attained in the 
field of action. We thus have first (1) the object of desire, 
70 dpexrov, Which xivet od Kwotpevov; next (2) is desire 
itself, dpeEcs (or 7d dpexrixov, the faculty of desire), and 
this «vet Kwovpevov; last (3) is the animal, which is a 
Kivovpevov od Kwodv—it gets moved without causing any 

further movement : it is the last term in the series. 
Comparison (2) M.A. 700 b 30. Thus it is evident that in one respect 

and contrast every animal gets set in movement (xivefrac) in the same 
ese manner as that in which the dei xwovpevoy gets “* moved ” 
with that by the del xwodv (which xwet ws epdpevov; see App. A 
of the § 3); in another respect, however, there is a difference, 
universe. for it is not ‘‘ moved ” det, but its every movement has a 

limit. This limit is ro od &vexa, the purpose aimed at by 
the movement, and when the purpose is achieved the 
movement ceases. : 

576 

APPENDIX B 

(3) M.A. 701 b 34 ff. (ch. 8). Putting the statement in § 1 Physical 

_ above in a slightly different form, we can say that the accompani- 
origin of movement in the animal is ro &v +@ mpaxr@ Gs se 
Sduoxrov Kai devxrov—the object of pursuit and avoidance ; 
in the field of action; and since 70 ¢evxrdv is painful and 
76 duexrév is pleasant, and since pain and pleasure are 
generally accompanied by cooling and heating, therefore 
the apprehension of these objects in thought or imagina- 

tion produces of necessity (€€ avayxns) cooling and heat- 
ing. Or again, in other words (ch. 7), desire (dpeéis), 
which as we have just seen (§ 1) is the ultimate, i.¢., 
immediate cause of movement, is effected either through 
sensation, ee or thought, and these bring about 
aAdoiwas (‘ alteration,” i.e., qualitative change) of 
various sorts—heating, cooling, expansion, contraction. 

(4) M.A., chh. 8-10. This dpeé&s, which brings about the seat of 
animal’s movement, must be situated in an apy7 (702 a 22) desire. 
and this dpx7 is the heart, or the counterpart of the heart 
in creatures which have no heart (703 a 14); besides, 
we can show independently that the apy; of the xwoica 
yvxy must be in a central position (702 b 15); and of 
course dpegis is the dpexrixdv faculty of the yvyy. Thus 
(701 b 28) when a sensation, or imagination, or thought 
produces an dAAoiwars in respect of heating or cooling at 
the region of the heart, a great change or difference. is 
produced in the body—+e.g., blushing, blanching, shiver- 
ing, etc. 

(5) It is important to notice that, according to Aristotle, the << Altera- 
movements of the living organism are not mechanically tion” __ 
caused. In M.A., ch. 7 he compares the small original poche 
stimulus (xiynos) required to set going an automatic of animals. 
puppet (cf. G.A., Il. 734 b 8 ff., 741 b 9) with the small 
change (eraBoAy) that occurs at the dpy7 (viz., the heart) 
of a living organism and produces great and numerous 
ch or “ differences *’ at a distance from the dpy7 
(cf. G.A. I. 716 b 3, V. 788 a 11); but he takes care 
to point out that whereas in the automaton there is 
no dAoiwas, no qualitative change—the action being 
entirely mechanical or “ clockwork ”—in the animal 
there is aAdoieiois ; in an animal one and the same part 
ean become hotter and colder, larger and smaller—it 
aAAowoora. 

U 5T7 

APPENDIX B 
Connate (6) M.4.,ch. 10. We have now established that it is épefis 

pone ihe —i.¢., yuxy operating in its faculty of desire—which is the 
ee Soul. formal’ cause of movement: it «ive? Kwodpevov. But 

acting in uvx7 is not material; and in living bodies there must be 
its faculty some physical substance (edpa) too which xwe? xwovpevov. 
of desire. And this is the XII. It «wet xwovpevor juevov by 
the dpx74 which is the yvyy; and that is why the XII is 
where it is. In fact, XII is the “ organ” or “ instru- 
ment ”’ of movement (see also De anima III. 433 b 18), 
capable of expanding and contracting, and in virtue of 
that capability it can exert force and so cause movement. 
And it causes movement by other means than dAdoiwais 
(7) GAAoudcer) ; it undergoes no qualitative itself, 
although it brings about changes of that sort in 
of the body (and in the embryonic material, as we shall 
see). nt 

Summary. Thus we must insert a fourth term in the series as originally 
i stated in § 1: + 
(1) The object of desire, 76 dpexrdv, which «we? od 
KUovLLEvo $ 
(2) Desire itself, épeéis, which xuwe?t xwovdpevor ; 
(2a) Lvpdurov Ivedpua, which also «we? Kwodpevov; . 
(3) The animal, which xwwetrar, but «we? nothing further. 

For further references to the action of the heart and the 
pneuma, see below, §§ 31, 32. 

Il. THE FUNCTION OF Svyudurov Hveipa IN GIVING 
PHYSICAL EFFECT TO THE MOVEMENT OF 

Opentixn (= yeventiKy) ux7. 

Embryo (7) G.A. IL. 741 b 37 ff. The parts of the embryo get de- — 
formed by limited, marked out from each other (d:opiovra), by 
means ro pneuma, but this is neither the pnewma of the female 
aneain: parent nor the embryo’s own pneuma. This is proved 
by the case of birds, fishes and insects : some are separate 
from the parent, since they get their articulation in the 

egg ; some do not breathe at all, being produced out of — 
larvae or eggs; and even those which breathe and get 
articulated in the womb do not breathe until their lungs 

578 

APPENDIX B 

are perfected, and both the lungs and the parts which 
— them get articulated before the creatures breathe. 

‘urther, the fissipede quadrupeds (dogs, ete.) are born 
blind, and the articulation of the eyelid is effected later. 
Thus we conclude that the same causes that are responsible 
for delimiting the young creature qualitatively are also 
responsible for its quantitative development—for actualiz- 
ing its latent quantitative potentialities. And of necessity 
pneuma must be present, 6ru bypov Kai Oepudv, rod pev 

_ mowbvtos, Tob 5€ macxorTos. 

(8) The understanding of this last remark may be helped by Physical 
_ a passage in M.A., ch. 8 and other passages. As we a¢ccompani- 
saw (§ 3), the apy} of movement in the animal is ‘“ the ™°*- 

object of pursuit and avoidance in the field of action ” ; 
and the thought and imagination of such objects is of 
necessity (€€ avdyxns) accompanied by heat and cooling 
(§ 3). Bodily pleasures and pains are accompanied by 
heat and cooling either in some part of the body or all 
over the body. Hence there is good reason in the way 
the inner regions of the body es the regions around the 
apxai of the instrumental parts have been fashioned— 
these regions change from solid to fluid and from soft to 
hard and vice versa. This being so, and “* the passive 
factor’ and “the active factor’? (more exactly, ‘* that 
which is so constituted as to act,”’ and ‘‘ that which is so 
constituted as to be acted upon *’) having the character > 
which they in fact have, when it so happens that the one 
is active and the other passive, and neither of them lacks 
any of the ingredients included in its logos, then immedi- 
ately the one acts and the other is acted upon, and we get 
simultaneously, ¢.g.; the thought “‘ I must walk’”’ and the 
movement of the limbs in walking—because the imagina- 
tion produces the desire, the desire produces the affections, 
and these suitably prepare the instrumental parts. 

(9) Now we must remember that the “ organ’ or “‘ instru- Instru- 
ment.” of movement, that which bridges the gap between mental 
the immaterial dpeéis on the one hand and the material oe of 
limbs of the body on the other, is the XII (§ 6) ; it is this pnewma 
which gives actual physical effect to the dpeéis. dpefis (a) in desire; 
thus, as Aristotle says, stands to the limbs in the relation 

@ This means that the same causes produce both the “ uniform parts ”’ 
(flesh, sinew, etc.) and also the “ non-uniform parts’’ (face, hand, 
leg, etc.). 

579 

APPENDIX B 

of zow.iy to macxor, Kiwodv to Kwovpevor ; but so does the 
XII too (§6). In fact, it is the ZI which brings about the 
‘preparation of the instrumental parts by’ in 
them the dAAoiwors of which they are capable : it a izes 
their potentialities of changing from soft to hard, etc. 

(0) in (10) Returning now to the passage of G.A., it would appear 
—— o that in the developing embryo also the XII plays a 
embryo. similar réle. It will be the XII which gives effect to the 

formal cause in the semen so as to produce an —- 
of a particular kind, just as in the other case it | 
effect to the: formal cause (viz., dpeéis) and p rs 
movement of the limbs; here, too, then it will actualize 
the latent potentiality of the material, bringing about | 
in it (741 b 12 ff.) the dAdolwars of which it is capable— 
making it soft, hard, ete. 
Connate (11) With this in mind we can go on and nterores the rest of 
PE reir the passage which follows in G.A. II. 742-743. (1) The 
ment of heart must be formed first, because it is the seat of the 
generative XII.* (2) The prePes extend from the heart all over the 

_ Soul. body, and thus can act as channels for the blood (which 

is the * matter ”) and for the XII % (which is the vehicle 
of the “‘ form,”’ 729 b 20)——because (De mt 480 a 10) ® 
all the dAéBes ‘pulsate simultaneously with the heart, and 
this pulsation is the pneumatization of the fluid as it gets 
heated in the heart. (3) Some of the “ uniform parts ” 
(by which term Aristotle means such things as flesh, 

nail, horn, sinew, bone) are formed by heat, others by 
cold ; ; and (740 b 18) the reasons why they are formed 
are (a) that the female’s “‘ residue ” is potslistalispetat 
the fully-formed animal itself is :' all the parts are present 
potentially in the residue; and (6) that ea the very 
similar passage referring to Opexrext Yu dot ae oted in § 8 
above) when “the active factor” “the passive 
factor ’’ come into contact “ in that + way in which the 
one is active and the other passive ” (which means in the — 
right manner, in the right place and at the right time), 
then immediately the one acts and the other is acted 

a These italicized phrases do not actually occur in the passage G.A. 
742-743, but they are to be supplied from the doctrine of other passages — 
here examined (see below, § 32) ; and we must realize that they repre- 
sent perhaps the chief consideration, though unexpressed, in Anistotle’s 
mind as he writes the present passage. 

» See § 31 below. 

580 

APPENDIX B 

» upon; the male supplying the dpyj of “ movement,” 
the female supplying the pantdelal, «Bt is Operrixy Yvy7 
which is the source of this movement (just as in the 
other case it was dpexrixy yvyy which was the source of 
the movement)—it brings about both generation and 

movement is “in” them. (This last sentence serves to 
emphasize the dual nature of XII, dealt with in §§ 20 ff. 
below ; for of course XII is the primary “ instrument ”’ 
Of Operrixy yux7.) : 
Further important statements on these subjects are 
din Meteor. IV. Hot substance and cold sub- 
stance, says Aristotle, are * active’’ (because they bring 
things together, are ovyxpir:xd), solid. substance and 
fluid substance are “passive.” Teévecis, i.¢., natural 
is the work of these dynameis; so is natural 
(xara dvow). df0pa; these processes occur in plants, 
animals, and their parts, and are brought about by hot 
and cold substance, when those éywar Adyov (ef. G.A. 
777 b 28), out of the substrate matter underlying each 
natural thing, viz., out of the “* passive’ dynameis. If 
hot and cold fail to gain the mastery over the matter, 
azepia results. Apart from destruction by force, the 
end of all natural objects is putrefaction: it may be 
defined as the dopa of the proper and natural (xara 
) heat in any fluid thing by the agency of alien 
eat (that of the environment), due*to lack of proper 
heat, i.¢., owing to cold; hence hot and cold are the 
causes of putrefaction as they are of yéveois. Animals 
are generated in putrefying substances because the 
heat that was secreted in these substances is natural 
and is able cvnoravas (see Introd. § 54). Cf. the whole 
Book, especially 390 b 2 ff.] 
(12) G.A. Il. 743.420. It is not any chance material which Requisites 
gets made into flesh or bone, nor does it get made in any for forma- 
ce manner or at any chance time, but only the Seton 
material ordained by Nature, and in the manner and at ; 
the time ordained by Nature: that which is potentially 
X will not be made, actualized, into X by any motive 
agent other than one which possesses the actuality ; nor 

: 581 

Connate 
pneuma 
analogous 
to aither: 
both are 
generative. 

APPENDIX B 

will a motive agent which possesses the actuality make 
an X out of any chance material. Heat is present in 
the seminal residue, possessing the right movement and 
actuality (évépyeca) to suit each of the parts ; and in the 
case of spontaneous generation the heat and movement 
of the season fulfil this same function.* 

(13) G.A. I]. 736 b 30 ff. Every faculty of yvy7 is connected 
with ° a physical substance more divine than any of the 
four ‘‘ elements’ Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and this sub- 
stance differs according to the degree of value of the 
yuxy concerned. There is present in the semen of 
every animal and in “ the foam-like stuff” ° the so- 
called ‘‘ hot substance,” which causes the semen to be 
generative: this is not of course Fire, but it is the 
pneuma which the semen contains, *‘ the substance in 
the pneuma,” * which is ‘* analogous to the element of 
the heavenly bodies,” viz., the aither. That is why the 
heat of the Sun (cf. App. A §§ 9, 10) and the heat of 
animals (as contained in semen or any ather such 
‘‘ residue ’’) is able to generate, whereas Fire cannot : 

the Sun, as we know already, consists of aither, and ~ 

here we are told that there is in semen ‘‘ something 
analogous ”’ to aither. wt 

(14) It is now possible to see what Aristotle means when he 
says (737 a 17): ‘* It has now been determined in what 
way fetations and semen have yuyy: they “have it 
potentially, but not in actuality.” ‘This pnewma or 
vital heat is not in actuality pvyn; but semen xwetrar 
with a movement that is identical with that which moves 

the animal’s body when the body is growing out of the | 

‘‘ ultimate nourishment ” (blood), and therefore when 
the semen gets into the uterus it sets in movement the 

« See further, § 17 and additional note appended there. 

> gouxe kexowwwrvyKevar, & usefully vague term ; but at any rate it must 
be intended to denote a close relationship. e might express it per- 
haps by saying that this substance (viz., the pneuma, or more precisely 
“the substance in the pneuma’’) with which yWwv7 is thus associated 
is the physical vehicle par excellence of yvx7y ; anyway, itis the first 
physical substance to give expression to the movements of ux; it 
is its immediate instrument. 

e Perhaps intended to include the “ frothy bubble ’’ concerned in 
spontaneous generation ; see §§ 17, 19 below. 

« Cf. the substance which is “‘in’’ Air, Water, etc., which is also 
“in”? aither, and which makes Air, Water, etc., transparent (§ 26). 

582 : 

- APPENDIX B 

female’s “ residue ’’ with the same movement as that by 
» which it «veirar itself. 
(15) Thus we have an exact parallel with the action of dpexri«?) Three 
already examined above, § 6: dpexrixi yuyy sets parallel 
in movement the pneuma, the pneuma sets in movement *heories. 
the limbs ; @perrixi (= yervntix?)) Yvyy} sets in movement 
_ the pneuma in the semen, the pnewma in the semen sets 
in movement the material supplied by the female. 
_ There is also a close parallel with the art of the carpenter 
_ (730 b 15 ff.): the carpenter, in whose yy} is the 
_ “ form ” of the chair, moves his hands and instruments 
with a movement appropriate to the object that is to be 
made, and they in turn move the material so as to 
produce the chair.* In all three cases no material part 
passes from the motive agent to the material on which 
it is working, but the agent imparts the‘ form ” to the 
ial by means of the movement whith it sets wp in 
the instrument. 

(16) We have thus satisfied the requirement that only what Heart 
is X in actuality can produce another X out of material formed 
which is potentially X : the parent which is X én actuality ™** 

uces another X out of the female’s residue which is 
potentially, but there is an intermediary, viz., the 
pneuma in the semen, which is an instrument possessing 
the requisite movement, a movement which is identical 
throughout, in parent, semen, and embryo (see also 
734 b). The semen thus is yvyq potentially (735 a 8); 
and the first thi which it produces ‘in actuality are 
wuyy and the physical seat thereof, viz., the 
heart. Later it produces in actuality sensitive yvyj as 
well. (Rational yYvy7, having no connexion with any 
physical substance at all, comes in independently from 
without ; 736 b). 
(17) A similar situation obtains in the case of spontaneous Spontane- 
- generation (762 a 18). Animals and plants are formed ous genera- 
in earth and in fluid because there is water in earth, and “- 
there is pneuma in water, and there is Soul-heat (deppyorns 
yvxixyH) in all pnewma ; so that “‘ in a way all things are 
full of yvx7.”” Hence plants and animals quickly form 
once this gets enclosed; and when this enclosing 

@ For another such reference to pneuma as an instrument used by 
Nature, see G.A. 789 b 8 ff. 
583 

APPENDIX B > 

happens, when the corporeal liquids get heated, a sort 
of “frothy bubble” is formed. Now the differences 
between the various creatures which are produced in 
this way are due to the stuff which makes up the envelo 
around the Soul-dpy7 (ef. also 738 b 34: foreign seeds pro- 
duce plants varying according to the soil in which they 
are sown, for it is the soil that provides them with their 
material and their body). We can now answer the 
question, What corresponds in cases of ntaneous 
generation to the ‘‘ residue” of the female and the 
semen of the male in cases of sexual generation? Just 
as in sexual generation the female by means of its heat 
concocts the “ residue ’’ (the menstrual fluid) out of the 
nourishment, so here the heat of the season by a similar 
process of concoction puts into shape a substance out — 
of the seawater and the earth (762 b 14). That which 
corresponds here to the male principle in sexual genera- 
tion is ‘‘ that portion of the Soul-apy% which is enclosed 
in the pneuma” as described above ; this, just as the 
semen does, makes a fetation out of the material and 
implants movement in it.* (ited 

[Note.—It is, however, not clear in what sense there is 
anything in the case of spontaneous generation which is X 
in actuality (i.e., which possesses the ‘‘ form” of X) com- 
parable to the parent in ordinary sexual generation. The 
relationship of agent and material here would appear to 
resemble rather that of carpenter and timber (for which see 
§ 15); but even so, granted that the requisite ‘‘ movement ” 
is present, it is difficult to see whence its specific character is 
derived ; for the Sun, ete., are “ motive,” not ‘ formal,” 
causes (App. A § 9). 

In the case of the carpenter, of course, the “ form ”’ is in 
the carpenter’s vxy (§ 15). From the passage referred to 
in § 17 it looks as though Aristotle falls back on the surprising 
explanation that it is the material only that determines what 
sort of creature is to be formed. If so, then we must assume 
that, given the agents, or “‘motive”’ causes, viz., yvx7}, pneuma, 
and the movement therein contained, though they are of no 
specific quality, the matter is formed by them into whatever 
creature it happens potentially to be. 

« Cf. § 12 above. 

584 

APPENDIX B 

. But in fact Aristotle himself is prepared to go even further 
than this. At Met. Z 1034 b 5 ff. he actually asserts that in 
the case of spontaneous generation of natural objects their 
matter can be set in movement by itself: it can supply itself 
with ee She bos movement as that — the semen supplies 
(Gow divarat Kai bd adris Kweioba Tavrny TH Kivnow 
iv 76 omépya Kwet). That is to oat it can supply itself with 
everything that in the normal way would have to be supplied 
by “form ”’ in the parent creature which is already X in 
actuality, or (in the case of artefacta) by the “* form ” in the 

7 of the craftsman. 

erhaps Aristotle felt that this startling admission was in 
some degree justified by the notion that even “ that out of 
which.” animals are generated is in a sense dvats (the €é od as 
well as the xa’ 6 and the i¢’ od of their generation is “ dvas,” 
Met. Z 1032 a 24)*; and, as we know, diors-never acts idly 
but always has a réAos in view. Regarded in this way, 
““ matter,” the ¢€ od of living things, might be looked upon 
as considerably more than mere lifeless, inert material; and 
in G.A. Aristotle does in fact ascribe even the possession of 
yxy to it, as we have seen. Thus, to classify the statements 
he makes in G.A.: (1) The case of Testacea, which arise in 
sea-water. Water contains pnewma, and pneuma contains 
Soul-heat (§ 17). (2) The case of animals and _ plants 
spontaneously formed out of putrefying matter. Mistletoe 
and similar plants are formed when either the soil or certain 
pene in plants or trees become putrescent (715 b 27 ff.). 
ow (i) Earth contains Water (§ 17), and, as we saw just 
now (ibid.), Water contains pneuma, which contains Soul- 
heat. And Soul is obviously present already in the plants 
and trees upon which mistletoe, etc., grow. (ii) As stated 
in § 13 above (G.A. 737 a 3 ff.), the heat of the Sun and of 
animals can effect generation, and not only the heat of animals 
which operates through semen, but also any other natural 
residue which there may be has within it a principle of life. 
This is no doubt intended to cover putrefying animal and 
vegetable matter (expressly mentioned at HA. 539 a 23 and 
551 a 1 ff.), out of which some insects were supposed by 
Aristotle to arise, and “‘ putrefying soil ” as well, which would 

also qualify under (i) above. 
A further palliative might perhaps be found in the con- 

@ See also the passages quoted at 741 a 1, n. 
585 

Semen 
contains 
pnewma. 

Pnewma 
contains 
Soul-heat. 

APPENDIX B 

sideration that in the case of animals it is sentient Soul alone 
which has to be supplied by the male parent, and for plants 
no sentient Soul is required. Testacea, too, were considered 
by Aristotle to be plant-like (see 715 b 17, 731 b 8 ff., 
761 a 12 ff.).] 9 ‘ 

(18) 

(19) 

586 

Ill. THE NATURE AND PROPERTIES OF 

ry 

Xvpudurov Ivedua 

To repeat first what we have heard so far of the nature 
of XII (736 b 30 ff. ; see § 13 above): There is in the 
semen of all animals the so-called Beppov, which cas 
the semen to be generative. This Oepydy is not Fire, for 
Fire cannot generate any animal, but the heat of the 
Sun and of animals (the heat that operates through their 
semen or some other residue) can do so: for this does 
contain a vital principle (w7i«7 dpyj). This substance 
which is contained in the semen is pnewma, and it is 
“analogous to the element of the stars,” viz., aither. 
One obvious way in which it is analogous to aither is 
that it is generative, for the Sun, which is of aither, is 
generative (see App. A §§ 9, 10). We shall find other 
points of analogy later on (§ 25). 

In the passage 735 a 29—736 a 20 we are told that semen 
when it leaves the body is thick and white, because it 
has in it much hot pneuma owing to the animal's internal 
heat ; when the heat in the semen has evaporated and 
the Air has cooled, then it turns liquid and becomes 
dark in colour. Thus semen is a combination of pneuma 
(here described as “‘ hot Air”) and water (xowov mved- 
patos Kai DSaros, To b€ mvedud €or Oepyos dnp, 736 a1); in 
fact, it is a foam, a mass of tiny bubbles. Similarly 
(762 a 20 ff.) in the case of spontaneous generation we 
have “a sort of frothy bubble ” formed, and this too 
contains pnewma, which contains Soul-heat (see § 17) ; 
cf. too the reference to “ the foam-like stuff ” (736 b 36) 
in which, as in the semen, there is enclosed pneuma, and 
in the pneuma a substance analogous to the aither. 
Thus pneuma is closely associated with heat—a special 
sort of heat, not the heat of Fire; and at 762 a 20 we 
read that ‘‘ there is Soul-heat in all pnewma.” 

APPENDIX B 

(20) Now although in all these passages the heat seems to Dual 
take the chief place, as it alas sees to take the leading character 
part in the formation of embryos, Aristotle says more °! ?™™™4- 
‘than once that the embryo is formed by means of cold as 
well as heat (see § 11 above; 743 a, 762 b 15, etc.). 

And it would seem that pnewma really has a dual nature. 

This is true of it when functioning as the instrument 

of dpexrixy Yvy7, and also when it is functioning as the 
instrument of yevynrixy pvyy (see § 10 above). Thus 
(M.A. 702 a 10) the instrumental parts of the body can 
change from solid to fluid, soft to hard, and vice versa, 

and it is pnewma which brings about these changes. 

Aristotle tells us (703 a 22) that pnewma contracts and 

expands, and “ has heaviness compared with fiery thin 

and lightness compared with the opposite things ”’ ; 

and that this power of contracting and expanding is . 

indispensable to it in view of the functions it has to 
_ perform, because the actions of movement are pushing 

and pulling. 

(21) De anima III. 433'b 18 ff. With further reference to Pnewma 

pushing and pulling, Aristotle in a brief reference in the effects 

anima to the De motu states that “ the instrument peat 
used by dpeéis in causing movement ”’ is to be found and pulling. 
where a beginning and an end coincide, ¢.g., at a ball- 
and-socket joint: one remains at rest and the other is 

moved : and the two though separable in definition are 

: not separable spatially ; for everything gets moved 

: _ pushing and pulling. (See also Phys. VII. 243 a 12 ff.) 

| Compare too M.A. 703 a 12: The IT stands in a 

similar relation to the Soul-apy7 as the point in a joint 
(which kwe? xwodpevov) stands to that which is unmoved. 

(22) There is a passage in the De caelo (IV. 301 b 20 ff.), sirasan 
where again Aristotle is discussing the way in which instrument 
movement is brought about, and although he is talking for effecting 
here of Air (xp) and not specifically of the kind of Air ™°Y*™e"* 
known as pneuma, the passage is apposite to our present 
subject. Now of course according to Aristotle, some 
of the movement which takes place in the sublunary 
world can be accounted for by his theory that the 
“simple natural substances’ Fire, Air, Water, Earth 
have a “ natural’ movement (see App. A § 2). But - 
movement is also caused forcibly ; and force can either 

587 

APPENDIX B 

accelerate natural movement (¢.g., itcan make a stone go 
downwards more quickly than it would do naturally) or 
it can produce movement contrary to Nature (e.g., it can 
make a stone go upwards) ; it is in fact the sole source 
of unnatural moyement. And in either case it uses Air 
as its instrument (@orep dpyav@ xpirar TO dé€pr), because 
Air is naturally constituted to be light and heavy (rédvxe 
kai Koddos elvar kal Bapis) ; the Air, qua light, will cause 
an object to be carried upwards, for the Air gets pushed 
and receives the apy} from the force which is exerti 
itself; qua heavy, it will cause the object to be carrie 
downwards: the force ‘‘as it were hitches the movement 
on to (évapayaca) the Air’ and so transmits it to the 
object in either case. Hence an object which is set 
moving forcibly (i.e, contrary to Nature) continues 
travelling although that which set it moving does not 
follow it up; and if there were no such physical sub- 
stance as Air there could be no such thing as enforced 
movement.* In the same way, says Aristotle, Air gives 
a fair wind to (cuverovpiter), helps on, natural movement. 
Dual char- (23) This dual nature of Air is not really so surprising as it 
acter of Air. sounds at first hearing, for (De caelo IV. 311 b 5 ff.) all 
the physical substances possess heaviness except Fire, 
and they all possess lightness except Earth. Jn its own 
place, each possesses heaviness, even Air; thus, except 
in Water and Earth, Air possesses heaviness. At 
312.a 12 ff. Aristotle lays down that the distinction of 
“form ”’ and.“‘ matter ’’ is to be found in the categor 
of ** place’ as well as in the categories of ‘‘ quality ” 
and ‘“‘ quantity”: thus, ré dvw belongs to the deter- 
minate, 76 xdé7w belongs to “‘ matter.” And taking the 
special instance of the “‘ matter” of ‘‘ the heavy and 
light,”’ gua potentially X it is the matter of the heavy, 
qua potentially Y it is the matter of the light: it is the 
same ‘ matter,” but its efva: is not the same (ef. 310 b, 
311.a). 
(24) For the important réle of Air as a medium between the 
objects which give rise to sensations and the sense-organ, 

« It should be remembered that according to Aristotle nothing can 
exert any effect upon (“‘move’’) another thing unless it is in contact 
with it; see Phys. If. 244 a, b, and G.A, II. 734a3. That is why the 
movement must be “‘hitched on” to the Air; ef. H.A. VII. 586 a17 

ovdéy yap purretrar wéppw avev Bias mvevpatiKys. 

588 

APPENDIX B 

and for importance of the réle of pnewma in conveying 
the effects made upon the sense-organ to the heart and 
so to the yvx7, see below, §§ 26 ff. od 
(25) We may now notice two other ways in which pneuma Pnewna 
, is “ analogous’ to aither. (a) We noted above (§ 6) 2nd aither 
_ that pneuma causes “ movement” (both dddoiwars and *2#!gous. 
spatial saat 1) eoneeens ae _— itself under- 
going any qualitative change. In this respect it is 
at similar to aither, for this too is not liable to any sort of 
“ movement ”’ (except circular ¢opa) ; Aristotle express! 
says that aither is not subject to adddoiwas (De eaelo ‘s 
270 a 14 ff.), and he even goes so far as to suggest that 
it is “ divine’ (270 b 10). (6) Pneuma, like aither, 
acts as an intermediary between an immaterial mover 
and material objects. As we have seen, the unmoved 
mover moves the Heaven and the heavenly bodies which 
are made of aither, and the heavenly bodies in turn 
“move ” sublunary bodies, viz., they bring about the 
transformation of the elements into one another, and 
also they bring about yéveais and ¢@opd. So too the 
- immaterial Yvy7 moves pneuma, and pnewma in’ turn 
causes ddAoiwais, thereby (i) moving the limbs of the 
body or (ii) causing the *‘ movement” which is the 
_deyelopment of the embryo. 

IV. THE FUNCTION OF Swyudvrov ITvedpa IN 
SENSATION 

The following outline of Aristotle’s theory of Sensation 
will indicate the important part played in it by Air and 
pneuma. it will be seen that just as pneuma transmits 
to the parts of the body the movements caused by ywvy7j and 
thereby produces dAAoiwors and movement, so in the reverse 
direction it apparently transmits to yvy7} the movement of 
the dAAoiwois caused in the sense-organs by the movements 
of external stimuli. 

It will be convenient to divide this account into two parts : 

A. dealing with what goes on outside the sentient body ; 

B. dealing with what goes on inside the sentient body. 

589 

Vision, (26) 

APPENDIX B 

A 
Visim.—Vision is effected in the following way (De 
anima II. 418 a 27 ff.). There are three main factors : 
Colour, the medium, and the sense-organ. 

** Colour ’”? means “‘ that which has the power to:set in 
movement that which is actually transparent” (rd Kar’ 
evépyecav diadaves), and the latter acts as the medium. 
The medium extends continuously from the object to the 
sense-organ, and in its turn sets the sense-organ in 
movement. The medium is indispensable, because 

- colour cannot set the sense-organ in movement direct. 

Hearing. (27) 

According to GA. V. 780 b 34 ff., accuracy in seeing 
distant objects depends upon the movement of the 
medium not being dissipated, but “ getting a direct 
passage ”” (ed@uzopeiv) ; indeed, the best results would 
be obtained if there were a continuous tube between 
the object and the eye (781 a 9). Compare the case 
of Hearing, § 27. be 

Examples of transparent media are Air, Water, and 

‘certain solids. Their transparency is due not to them- 
selves, but to the fact that they contain a certain sub- 
stance which is also found in the “* eternal substance of 
the Upper Cosmos ” (ev 7@ dudiw 7O dvw owdparr), t.é., in 
the aither. Of this substance the actualization is Light ; 
and its actualization is brought about by the agency 
of Fire or something of a similar kind.as the substance 
of the Upper Cosmos—for this selfsame substance is 
present in both.? Thus Light is essential if vision is to 
take place, because it is only when the substance in the 
medium is actually (not merely potentially) transparent 
that it can be set in movement by colour. 
In the case of the other senses too a medium is indis- 
pensable ; one example may suffice. In Hearing there 
are again three main factors: the sounding object, the 
Air, and the sense-organ. 

** A sounding object ”’ (yodn7i«dv) means “ an object 
which can set in movement a continuous volume of Air 
as far as the dxoj”’ (the organ of hearing), and the 
movement of the Air constitutes sound only when the 

« The obscurity of this sentence is due to Aristotle’s text, not to my 
presentation of it. 

590 

APPENDIX B 

Air is thus set in movement as one continuous entity 
and is prevented from being dissipated. (This require- 
ment necessitates that the object struck should have a 
smooth surface, otherwise the Air cannot be moved as a 
unity.) Hence here too the medium must be continuous 
between the sounding object and the sense-organ ; and 
its movement in turn sets in movement the Air in the 
ear (De anima II. 420). 

~ 

B 

__ (28) Since (De sensu 438 b 7) there must be light within the Vision. 
eye as well as in the external medium, the eye also will 
have to be transparent ; hence the eye, or rather that 
part of the eye which sees, viz., the xépy or pupil, is made 
of Water (H.4A. I. 491 b 20, De sensu 438 a 13 ff., P.A. 

~ Il. 656 b 1, G.A. V. 779 b 23 ff.). Thus the external 
medium and the internal constituent are both trans- 
parent. The substance used for the eye is Water and 
not Air because Water is more easily kept in a confined 
s than Air (De sensu 438 a 15; P.A.II. 656 b 2). 
nd it is of course the movement of this part gua trans- 
parent, not qua fluid, that constitutes sight (G.A. V. 
780 a 4; cf. De sensu 438 a 13 ff.). If the fluid in the 
eye is already in violent movement owing to some 
earlier stimulus, it cannot respond to a fresh movement 

from without (G.4. V. 780 a 8 ff. ; ef. a 23). 

(29) The sense-organ of Hearing is of Air (De anima ILI. Hearing, 
425a4; cf. P.A.11.656b17; GA. V. 781 a 23); and 
“the Air in the ear is built into a chamber (éyxatwxodé6- 
#yrat) in order to keep it free from disturbance (zpés 76 
axivnros eivac), so that it may take up the movements 
conveyed to it from without, é7ws dxpiBds aicPdyyra 
mdaas Tas dvadopas tis kwycews (De anima II. 420 a 10; 
cf. the very similar phrase frequently used in G.A. V. 
779 b—781 b). This Air in the ear is also described as 
“ connate "’ (cupdujs; De anima II. 420 a 12); and it is 
this Air with which we hear. It is itself always in 
movement with a proper movement of its own (oixeia 
Kamas); sound, however, is of course not this proper 
movement, but a movement derived from something 
else (aAAdrpios). 

591 

APPENDIX B 

nang (30) Now rg arises from the ae _ of ar fl 
TUK} } (%) atcPnots azo Tis ias; P.A. IL. 656 b 24 ; 
conte «of. 656 a 28, III. 666 a 12, also II. 647 a 25 and @.A. II. 
paces. 743 b 25), for no bloodless part has the power of sensa- 
tion, nor has blood itself; the power resides in “ one 

of the parts that are made out of blood” (P.A. ILI. 

666 a 17, II. 656 b 19). Hence the movement in the 

sense-organ must somehow be conveyed to the heart. 

Now it is evident that the senses of touch and taste are 

connected to the heart (P.A. Il. 656 a 29; ef. De sensu 

439 a 1); so are the others, though perhaps not so 

obviously and directly. Thus, from the eyes “ pass- 

ages *’ (wdpor) run to the ¢AéBes around the brain, and 

similarly from the ears a “* passage” connects to the 

back of the head (P.A. II. 656 b 17). This is confirmed 

and amplified by G.A. Il. 744 a 2, where smell and 

hearing are said to be “‘ passages ” full of XII, connect- 

ing with the external Air, and terminating at the ¢Aefra 

which come from the heart and extend around the brain. 

#A€Bes con- (31) In the passage of G.A. V. 781 a 23 ff., which is perhaps 

nected to * : ; 
out of place and possibly slightly corrupt, some import- 
bh pected ant statements are fortunately clear. We read there 
the connate that the ** passage ’’ of the organ of hearing terminates in 
pneuma.. the region where the XII produces the pulsation (deriv- 

ing, as will be seen, from the heart); and we also read 
of the “‘ movement ” which comes through the sense- 
organ of hearing (presumably to its destination in the 
heart) being reproduced again through the voice; at 
any rate, it is clear that the heart is the dpyy of the 
voice (IV. 776 b 12; ef. V. 787 b—788 a). Further 
details about the pulsation are given-in De resp. 
479 b 30 ff. Pulsation, says Aristotle, is similar to 
boiling, which occurs when fluid substance is pneumatized 
by 76 Oepuov: the fluid rises up owing to increase of 
bulk. Pulsation is produced in the heart by the in- 
crease of bulk, caused by heat, of the fluid which is 
continually being supplied to the heart from the nourish- 
ment. This action goes on continuously, because the 
blood is fashioned first of all in the heart, and the inflow 
of the fluid out of which the blood is produced goes on 
continuously. And all the Pe pulsate too, simul- 
taneously with each other, because they are all — 

592 

APPENDIX B 

connected to the heart. Pulsation is, in fact, “‘ the 
= agpomammagrag of the fluid as it gets heated.” 

(32) This seems to give us the key to the theory of sensation Continuity 
as well as the explanation of the upkeep of the [II. The °f com 
fluid, as it gets heated and thereby concocted and turned Preima 
into blood, is “* pneumatized.”” This no doubt implies from sense- 
that the pnewma which is already present in the fluid (as organ to 
it is in any fluid; see § 17 above), and which contains »®** 
Soul-heat, acquires some special character or rather 
“movement ” by being brought into contact with the 
heart, and with the Soul which has its seat there and 
whose “ instrument ” the pneuwma is destined to become ; 
— we pei seas this, paneer semen contains 

© pneuma which possesses the specific “‘ movement ™ 
that is to fashion the embryo (§§ 9, 14 above), and it is 
from blood that semen is made by further concoction. 
Hence blood will contain DI, and we may say that all 
the ¢AéBes are instinct with XII as well as with blood. 
Hence there is continuity of DI (or of “‘ the substance 
Similar to aither,” if this is really to be distinguished 
from II) from the sense-organ, through the “ passages” 
and then the ¢AcBes, right up to the heart. We have 
Aristotle’s explicit statement that the ‘“ passages” of 
* smell and hearing, which are full of XII, terminate at 
the ¢A¢€8ia which come from the heart, and that the 
“ passage ” from the eyes does so too. And the ¢A¢Bes 
of course pulsate owing to the “ pneumatizing ” action 
set up in the heart. 

(33) As Beare says on the last page of his book, Greek Conclusion. 
Theories of Elementary Cognition (p. 336), “ if we could 
discover all the properties and functions of =I, we 
should have penetrated to the inmost secrets of sense- 
perception’ as envisaged by Aristotle; for “ the XII 
was profoundest cause and the most intimate sus- 
taining agency from the beginning to end of life and 
sensory power.” 

593 

Ue 

INDEX 

Tue Index is to be regarded as supplementary to the Con- 
tents-Summary on pp. lxxi ff.; see also the Introduction and 

Appendix. 

The method of reference is this : ; 

Roman numerals refer to p. 

es of the Preface. 

I denotes paragraphs of the Introduction. +) 

A and B denote paragraphs of Appendix A and B. 

The numbers 15a to 89b (standing for 715a to 789b) refer 
to the pages and columns of the Berlin edition which are 
printed at the top of each page of the Greek text. The 
lines are referred to in units of five lines: thus 

17al=717al—4 ! 
17b5=717b5-9 : 
f, ff= following section(s) of five lines, following page(s) 
etc., as the case may*be. 
In the text references, each entry is separated from the 
preceding one by a dash (/), unless they both have the same 

Berlin page-number. 

equa 

se ceagoagic throughout include footnotes. 
ly to the entries which refer to the Greek text. 

(This applies 
For 

example the mention of W. W. Jaeger in the footnote to 

719al11 is listed as 19a10.) 

abortion 73al, b15 

“ abscession ” I 67 / 24b25 

per accidens, etc. 64b35 / 
67b10, 25 | 83a35 

Acquapendente, Fabrizio of : 
see Fabricius ; _ 

acquired characteristics 
21b30; — fluid 50a5; — 
heat I 69 / 47al5 

594 

active and passive 29a25 f, 
b5 ff / 40b20f / 42a15 | 
68b15 ff / 72a25 / B7 ff 

actual and potential I 34 ff, 
50 / 26b15 / 34a30, b10, 
20, 35 | 35a5f | 36b5 fF | 
37a15f | 38b1 | 39b35f / 
40a20 f, b20 f / 41a10, 20, 
b5 ff / 42a10 / 43a20 | 

‘ 

INDEX 

44a5 / 62b1 | 68al0, bi | 
69b1 / B 7, 10, 11,12, 14, 
16, 26 
Adrianic fowls 49b25 
Aeschylus 63b30 
age 83b5 / 84a30, b30 / 87b5 
air 81a20 / 84b10 f / 86a5 ff / 
B 22, 23, 26 ff 
aither 1 32, 45 / 36b35 | 
61b15/ A 2,7; B13, 18, 
25, 26 
albinism 85b30 f 
Alemeon xvii f / I 25,40 / 
'52b25 / 69220 
Alkmaion: see Alemeon 
allantois 53b20 
ion (d\oiwors) I 48 | 
5, 6, 8, 10, 25 
— (peraBody) Tial | 73al 

analogous ”’ I 
71 ff 15b20 / 26b1 | 275 | 
28a20, bl / 35a25 / 36b35 / 
S37b1 / 38b15 / 39al5 / 
40a20 | 41b15 / 42b35 / 
43a10 | 45a5, b10 / 54al / 
60a10 ff / 61a25 | 65b30 / 
66a30, bl / 68b30 
79al / 81a20 / 82al5, 
30 / 84b15 / B 13, 18, 19, 
25 

Anaxagoras xviif / 23a5f / 
56b15 | 63b30 | 65a5 

Anaximander 61b5 

Andronicus of Rhodes xxxiii 

animals 36a30 / 38b20 / 
40a15 / 41al0 ff / 57b15 / 
A 15-18 

— blooded and bloodless I 
74 | 15a20 ff / 32a20 

— classification of lxxii / I 
74 ff ( 32025 fF 

— higher 32a15 
— made for man I 5 
ect I 76 / 32b30 ff / 
33b1 / 37b5, 15, 25 / 63b20 / 
T7bl 
aorta 38a10 
Apellicon xxxiii 
Aphrodite 36a20 
Ardaillon, E. 36b15 
Aristotle's Masterpiece v 
Aristotle’s Dissections : see 

dissection 
— method viii ff 
— Protrepticus 31a30 | 32a10 
— zoological works vi ff 
apes A 14-13 
apiua A 15-17 
16 / 34b20, 35 f / 40b25 / 
62a15 | 75a20 
Artaxerxes Mnemon 36al 
articulation 41b35 ff 
ass 48a15 ff 
atomism xviii 
automatic puppets 34b10 / 
41b5 

axial gradients xi / 41b25 

Baconian method viii, xi 

Bailey, C. xviii 

baldness 8245 ff / 83b5 ff 

Balss, H. xvii 

barnacles 63a30 

barrenness 67a35 / 73b25 f 

batos 46b5 

bear 74b15 / 85b35 

Beare, J. I. 1 46 

bees ix / 59al—6lal / 63a15 / 
70a25 ! 86b1 

“* being ” (ovata) v / 1 47, 52 | 
24bt / 31b380 / 38b25 / 
67b30 f / 78a35 f/ A 1, 12, 
15, 16,18 

595 

beloné 55a30 

* better,” the 17a15 ff, b 30 / 
38b1 / 65a5 / A 123 see 
also necessity 

bile I 67 

* biogenetic law ” 36b1 

birds 49a35 ff / p.368 / T4a5, 
b 25ff 

— nidicolous and nidifugous 
74b25 

Bitterauf, K. E. v, xxiv ff 

Black Sea 82b30 

blend I 25, 39 f / 44a30 / 
52b30 | 55a20 | 67a30 | 
77b5 / 81a30 — 

blood I 63 ff, 69, 73. f / 26b1 
ff / 28a20 / 51b1 / 65b20 / 
66a30 / 76b10 / B 30-32 

blood-serum 61b5 

blood-vessel 38a25, 35 
40a20 f / 43al f, b25 / 
44al | 64b30 | 76b10 | 
77a5 / B11, 30 ff 

— — Great 38a10 

blooded and bloodless ani- 
mals I 74 

boiling 52a1 f / 53a30 / B 31 

bones 43a15 f / 62a30 / 87b15 

Bonitz, H. xxviii 

brain 43b25 ff / 47a15 / 
80a20 / 82b10 f / 83b25 f 

breath, holding of 18al / 
28a10 / 38al / 75b1 

bregma 44a25 | 85al 

Broken Hill 35b15 

bronze 47b1 

Bryson 57al 

bubble 62a20 / B 17 

bull 87b5 ff 

Burnet, J. xvii 

Bussemaker xxiv, xxvii 

Biitschli, O. 36a10 

596 

camel 71a20, b5 ; 

caprification 15b25 / 55b10_ 

carpenter 29b15 / 30b5 ff _ 

castration 16b5 / I7bAi t 
87b20 ff . 

cataract (eye) s0als 

caterpillar 58b5 ff 

causation, mechanical 34b5 
ff / 41b5 / BS 

Causes, the Four xi ff / 
I 1 ff / 15al ff / 17a10 fF / 
31b20 ff / 42a20 ff / 65b5 f / 
78a30 ff / 89b1 ff) A18 

Cavolini 41a35 

Cephalopods 20b15 /. s1b30 / 
55b30 | 57b30 fF / 

Cephaloptera éb2s 

cestreus 41b1 /62b20 

chalazae 52b5 gests itt 

Chalcedon 21b80. 

chameleon 50a10 

change: see movement, al- 
teration 
oe over’ ’ 66a15 ff / 
68a15 ff / 87b5, 20, 30 ff 

channa 15a20 | 55b20 / 
56a25 | 60a5 

channel 81b5 

Charles, King 27b30 

Child, C. M. 41b25 

Chios 63b1 « * 

chorion 39b30 / 45al, 18 oe 
53b20-—54a10 

chrysalis 33b10 / 58b30. 

cicatricula 51b5 

climate 52b30 / 53a5, 15) f / 
60b1 f / 62b10 / 63b10 / 
67a25 ff | 77a5 / $1a30 f | 
83a10 / 88al5 / B12, 17 

Cnidos 36a1 | 

INDEX 

col cooling 48435 ff / 

T7b25 

sone onto a P8595 6¢e_/ 
ff | 2520 ff | 26a10, 

20, b25 

colour 80b20 ff / B 26 

— of eyes 79a25 ff 

— of hair 84a20 ff 

completion (telos) 15a15 / 
$4b15 / 35al5 / 41b1 

conception 39a25 

concoction I 8, 25, 30, 62 ff / 
50b25 / 52b15, 30 / 53al5 / 
75al5 | 86a15 | et passim 

— of embryo 19a30 / 29a15 / 
30a15 / 44b1 | 75al5 

— of fruit 15b20 

— of nourishment and semen 
18a5 / 19bl / 25b20 / 
26a5, b30 / 28a15 / 38al0 / 
39a10 | 62b5 / 65b1 ff / 
66a30 / 84a35 / B 32 and 
see above 

congenital: see connate 

conical vessels 39b10 

connate oem: congenital) 
21b25 / 50a5 / B 29; see 
also pneuma 

contact 30b5 ff, 30 / 34al,. 
bi ff / B 20 ff 

controlling (xpos) 44b10 / 
71lal0 / 72b25 / 73a5 | 
76b5 | 78al / 83b20 

cooking 67a20 

copaitation: of fish 56a30 ff: 
of birds, erroneous theories 
56b10 f 

cornice 81b10 

cotyledons (uterus) 45b30 ff / 
71b25 ; (plants) 52a20 

counterpart : see “ analogy ”’ 

cowardice 50a10 

cranes 85a20 

crocodile 32b15 

crooked talons 46b1 / 49b1 ff 

crow 74b25 

Crustacea 20b5 f / 55b30 / 
57b30 ff / 61b5 

cuckoo 50a10 f 

cupping-glasses 37b30 

curly hair 82b15 ff 

current 63b1 

Cuvier xx 

cycles A passim 

Dante I 5 {-p. 1 / 78b1 / 
A3,9 : 

Dareste, C. xi 

deciduoma 75b25 

decoys 51lal5 

defensive weapon 59bi, 30 

*‘ deformation” I 12 f / 
24b30 / 28b10 / 37a25 / 
43a30 / 46b30 f / 47a25 / 
48b35 f / 49a15 / 66a25 / 
67a35 / 69b30 / Tlal / 
73a10 / 75al, 15 /$4a10, bl 

Democritus xviii / 21b10 / 
40a10, 35 / 42b20 /-46a15 / 
47a25 f | 64a5, 20 ff / 
69al5, b30 / 88b10 ff 

demonstration 42b25 f 

departure from its nature 
25a25 ] 49b30 / 68al, 25, 
b5, 25 

diaphragm 17al / 18b1, 20 / 
19a5, 15 f / 38b15 / 41b25 / 
47a20 | 49a30 / 76b5 f 

Diocles 45b30 ff 

Diogenes of Apollonia 36a10, 
20 | 46a15 

dissection, Dissections 19a10 | 

597 

INDEX 

40a20 / 46a15 f | 64a35 | 
79a5 

Dittmeyer, L. xxvi, xxix 

divine I 3, 45 / 31b25 / 36b30 / 
37a10 / 6la5 / B25 

dog 38b30 / 42a5 | 46a30 / 
70b1 / 71a20 / T4b15; see 
also Laconian hound 

— Indian 46a30 

dogfish, smooth : 
telus laevis 

dolphin 32b25 / 56b1 

dominance, physiological 
41b25; see also control 

dove 74630 

dream 79al10 f 

Duprat, G. L. I 46 

dwarf 49al1 

dynamis | 23-27, 60 / 16a20 f / 
20b30 | 22b30 / 25al / 
26a10 ff | 27b15 | 29a25, 
bd, 25 f / 30a1, 10 / Slal, 
b15 / 33b15 / 36a20 f, 
b35 / 38b20 / 39al5 / 
40b30 f / 51a30 / 56al / 
60a15 | 63b20 / 65b10 f, 
35 ff / 66a20, 30 | 67b20 fF / 
68b25 / 72a5 f, 25 | 80b5 / 
84b15 / 85b10 

see Mus- 

earth: see Elements 

Earth, the 16a15 

earth-born 22b20 / 62b25 

earthenware 43a15 

“* earth’s-guts ” 62b25 

ecliptic A 9 f 

eddies 72b15 f 

eel ix / 41b1 / 62b20F / p. 565 

* efflux ’”? 58b5 

egg, definition of 31a5 / 
32a25 f / 63a10 

eggs 18b30 ff, see also ovum 

598 

— perfect and imperfect 
(cleidoic and non-cleidoic) 
I 56, 77 | 18b5 ff / 32b5 | 
33al5 fF / 49al5 | 51a25 / 
54al5 ff / 55b25 f / 56a20 / 
57a25 f | 58a30 fF 

— of trees 31a5 ¢ 

‘““eggs”’ of Crustacea, te. 
17a5 / 63b1 fF > 

eggshell 52a30 

Egypt 70a35 

Element, fifth 36b35 | A 2; 
see aither . 

Elements, the four I 22, 24 / 
15al0 / 22a35/ 29a30 / 
36b30 / 61a30 ff / A 2,9, 12 

elements of man A 9 > 

elephant 19b15 / 71a20, bd / 
73b5 / 77b1, 15 | 82b5. 
elephantiasis 68b35 

Elis 22a10 iad 

Elmore brothers 35b15 Us 

a growth of 23910 f / 

— diagram of menibfanes of © 
chick p. 369 ; 

Empedocles xvii ff / 18b35 } 
22b5 ff | 23a20 f / 31a5 / 
47a25 ff | 62b30 / 64al— 
65a10 / 69al5 | Tia5 | 
79b15 ; 

Ephesus, Michael of xxv, xxxi 

Epicharmus 24a25 

Epicureans 27b35 

Epicurus 46a15 

 epigenesis ” x / 33b20 ff 

Erechtheus 62b30 

erythrinus 15a20 | 41a35 / 
55b5, 20 | 56a25 | 60a5 

essence 42b30; see being 

eternal 31b25 ff | 42b25 t / A 
14-17 

INDEX 

Ethiopian 2210 / 36a10 / 

déficiency I 39 / 
37b5 | 71b30 ff / 76a15 
eyelid 42a10 / 44a35 ff 
Sree Sane) ff 19225: 

Fabricius, H.. 
Reece | ates ashe 
feathers 49b5 

female passim 

— a deformation I 13 / 

37a25 | 67a35, bd / 75al5 
fetation I 56 ff / 24b15 J 

ab Aquapen- 

ere 7 eaten. jab a35 | 
50b25 / 57b15 / 58a30 / 
6705; 15, 50/7601 /'B.1T / 

et passim 
— (egg) 37b5 | 52b5 
— (=roe) 41a35 

juice 29a10 / 37al5 / 

71b20 f / 72a20 
fig-tree 15b25 / 37a15 / 

55b10 / 71b20 

ity, internal I 5, 16 

fire 37al / 61b15f / B 13, 19, 

26: see also Elements 
fire-animals 61b15 f 
fish 51a30, b15 f / 54a20 ff 
fishermen 56a30 f 
fishing-frog 49a20 / 54a25 ff / 
55b30 

fissipede animals 56b30, etc. 
fleas 21a5 / 23b1 

flies 21a5 / 23b1 / 60a10 
flogging 48a20 

flotation 35b15 

“ fluid * matter I 38 

— — conducive to life 33a10 / 
61a25 fF 

— — contains heat 83a35 / 
B17 

flute: see pipe 

flux 68b35 

foam 35b10-36a20 / 36b35 / 
62a20 / 63a25 / 86a5 / B13, 
17, 19 

fontanelle 44a25 

force I 37 / 37b30 fF / 39al / 
88b25 / B 22 

fowl 38b30 / 46b2 / 49b10f / 
50a25 / 70al0 f, 30 

fox 38b30 /-42a5 / 46a34 / 
T4b15 

Fox, H. M. 38a15 

framework 40a20 / 43al / 

“from,” meanings of 
24a20 ff / 29b15 
froth: see foam 

galena 35b15 

gall-bladder 71a5 

Gastropods 61b30 

Gaza, Theodore of xxi, xxv 

generation, methods gf 
32a25 ff 

— reasons for 31b20 ff: see 
also yéveats 

— spontaneous 15a20, b25 / 

~31b10 / 32b10 / 43a35 | 

57a30, b20 / 58a5 / 59a5 / 
61a15, b20 f / 62a5—63a30 / 
Bi7 

genes 33b20 / 63b25 / 78a30 

yeveots (and dfopa) I 5, 9, 
47 f, 52 f / 41b20 / 42b25 f / 

599 

INDEX 

66a15, bid / 76b1 / 77b15 
ff / 78alf/ A passim; B25 
gestation, time of 69b20 / 
72b5 | 76a20 | 77a25 ff 
ginnos 48b30 ff 
Glasdir 35b15 
gnats 21al0 
goat 70b30 f / 79a30 | 85b25 
Gody/15/A 3, 12 
Goodrich, E. S. 41a35 
goose 71b15 
Gordius 62b25 
grape-vine 70b20 
grass 85a30 
Grassi, G. B. p. 565 
greyness 80b5 / 84a25 ff 
Gymnotus 41a35 

Haberling, W. 54630 

hair 81b30 ff 

hare 74a30 / 83a5 

Harun al-Raschid xx 

Harvey, William xii, xix / 
27b30 | 51b5 | 54al 

hat 85a25 

Haynes, William 35b15 

Heape, W. p. 565 

hearing 81al0 ff / B 27 ff 

heart I 11, 21, 51, 63 / 35a20 / 
38b15 / 40al ff / 41b15 / 
42b35 | 43b25 / 44030 / 
66b1 / 73al0 / 76b10 f / 
81a20 | B passim 

heat 29b25 / 30a15 / 32a20 / 
37al f / 43a30 ff / 44030 

— of Soul or vital heat I 29-f, 
62 | 32a15 | 39al0 | cf. 
39b20 / 51b5 | 52al / 
55a20 | 62a20 | 66a35, 
b30 / 83b30 / 84a35, b5, 
25 | 86a10, 20 / B 17, 19, 
32 

600 

— proper to each 
body I 62 / sa35, bb, 26 
86a20 
heavents s), the isenss 61b15 / 
1 

heavenly bodies TTb1s. f / A 
passim ; B13 — 

hectocotylized arm ix spel 
20b30 £ 

hee 17b25 / 19bi5 s= 

Heidel, W. A. xviii — 
Heilbrunn, L. V. 36a10 
hemorrh 38al5 
hemorrhoids 27a10 
Heracleitus vi 
Bete: “ 31 / 21b30 re 

essere it TOb35 — 
Herodorus 57al 
Herodotus 36a10 / 56b5 — 

e€is 26b20 

hibernation 83b10, 20 

“high - bred ” birds 
(thorough-bred) 30a10 / 
49b30 

Hippocrates and Hippocratic 
treatises x, xvi f, xviii f / 

I 24, 27, 33, 40, 67 /21b10/ 
24b35 | 25b5 | 36al10, 
b35. / 37b30. | 39al / 
40b15 / 42a1 | 44a30. | 
46a15 / 66a20 / 67a25 ff / 
70a35_ | 76b30 / 77b5 | 
80al5 

hoar-frost 84b15 f 

Homer 84al5 © 

‘homonyms ” 2lal / 26b20 / 
34b25 | 35a5 

‘* honeycombers ” 61b30 ff 

hornets 6lal ff / 86b1 

horns 62a30 

INDEX 

en ff / 71a20 / 
73b25 / 7T7b10 / 79b1 / 
80b5 / 82a10 / $5al0 f 
yo ohne rial 
565 

46229 ff 
hyena ix / 57al ff / pp. 565 f 

Iberia 48a25 

ibis 56b15 

Ibn al-Batriq xx 

ichor 1 66 / 25a15 

incubation 52b15 ff 

Indian dog 46a30 

, Nature avoids 15b15 

Insects 21al ff / 23b20 / 
58a30 fF 

instrument (tool, organ) I 2, 
31 f, 42, 45, 50°/ 16a20 / 
30b15 ff / $4b25 | 38b25 / 
40b30 | 42a15 / 65b35 ff / 
66a20 | 88225, b20 / 
89b5 f / B 6, 9, 10, 11, 15, 

16, 20, nsdn en also parts, 

(0 ag teased label 

fekaetiinet straight and 
twisted 17a20 f 
intuition 42b30 

jackdaw 56b20 

Jaeger, W. W. viii / 1 46 / 
19a10 / 36a10 / 46al5 / 
61b15 

jay 74b25 

Job 39b20 / 52b30 

Jones, W. H. S. xvii 

juices 69a30 

Kelts 48a25 
kestrel 50a5 
Knidos 36al 
knowledge 31a30 ff / 56a30 
Ktesias 36al 

Laconian hound 38b30 / 
46a30 / 81b10 

lagoon 61b5 / 63b1 

] m-oysters 63a30, b10 

e 61b1 

larvae I 77 / 23b5 / 29b30 / 
32a30, b10 33a25 f,; 
bi0 f / 52a25 | 55al5, 
bi / 58a30 ff / 62b30 ff 

laughter 79210 

Laurium 35bi5 

lead ore 35b15 

leopard 85b10 

Leophanes 65a25 

tocephalus p. 565 

Lesbos 63b1 

leucorrhea 28al 

Levy, R. xx 

Libya 46b5 / 70a35 

(Libyan) ostrich 49b15 

** like to like ” 40b15 / 41b10 

linen 83a10 

lion 42a5 / 50a30 / 60b20 f / 
T4b15 / 88b15 

liquefaction of yolk 53b1, 25 

“ little-endian ” 52a15 

lizard 32b1, 15 

locust 21a20 

logos 1 1, 10, 69 / 15al f / 
16a15 f / 26b20 / 29a25 / 
31b15 / 32a5 / 34b30 
35al | 40b30 / 67b20 
78a30, b10/ B8 

loom 17a35 | 87b20 / 88al 

Lophius piscatorius : see 
fishing-frog 

_— 

601 

INDEX 

lophouroi 55b15 | T7b5 
Lucretius 27b35 
lung 32b30 

male and female xi ff / I 68 / 
l5al5 ff / 16a5 ff, b15 ff / 
24b10 | 29a10, bd ff / 
31b15 ff / 38b20 / 40b25 | 
4lal ff / 55b5 / 62b1 ff / 
63b20 ff / 65b5 fF / 75a5 fF 

— — — contrasted 27a15 ff / 
28al5 

-— provides Form, etc. 
xi ff / 29b5 ff / 30a25 / 
38b25 / 64b10 / 65al / 
7ib15 f 

man 45b10 f / 62b25 / 70a30 / 
72b1 | 73b5, 25 | 74a25 / 
75a25 | 76b20 f / 77b1 f | 
80b5 / 81b15 f / 82a5 fF / 
83b5 ff / 85b5 
“mantle” of 7s Pari 
20b25 

marsh 41b1 

marsh-birds 51b10 

Marshall, F. H. A. 38a15 I 
73a30 
** mastering ”’ 66a15 ff / 
67b10 ff / 72b80 

Matter, levels of I 14 ff / 
29a30 | 33b25 

— unevenness of I 8 / 78a5 

— and Form xi ff / 24b5 / 
29al0 | 32a5 

— of generation 27b30 / 
29a10, 30 

Matthews, L. Harrison pp. 
565 f 

meat, cooking of 76al f 

membranes 39b30 / 46a1, 15 / 
53b10, b15—54al / 58b1 | 
81a20 

602 

menstrual discharge 

metachoiron 49al f | 70b5 | 

metamorphosis 32a30 

Meyer, A. W. 33b20 Ru 

milk 39b25 / 52 b20f [Weald ff 

milt 30a20 / 55b5. : nee - I 
57al5 f 

mistletoe 15b30 — AV 

modellers 43al 

Moerbeke, William. mth 
xxix 

mola uteri 75b25 ff 

monstrosity xi / 676, 15 i 
69b10 fF / 72a85 

moon I 11, 51 / 38al5 | 
61b20 / 77b20 fF 

moon-animals 61b20 

more-and-less I 70 ff / sibs / 
39b30 / 61b15 / ropa ta 

morphogenesis xi 

nae (fungus) 84b10 ff 

moulting 83b10 ff 

mouse 71a20 Y 
‘movement ” xiv / I 2, 3, %, 
11, 29, 32, 34 f, 45, 47 ff, 
55, 63, 68 / 29b5 ff 
30b5 ff / 34b5 f / 37a20 / 
40625 f | 41b10 / 43a30 / 
66b10 / A and B passim: 

movers, unmoved xiii / A Sf, 
12’: (B 1,.2326 

mule 28b10 /46b10 f/ 47220- 4 
48b30 

Miiller, J. ix / 54b30 

Muraena 41a35 

mussel 61b30 / 63b10 

Mustelus laevis viii | 54b15, 
30 

mutilated offspring 21b15 / — 
Q4al f 

—. 

INDEX 

natural=general or normal 
18, 12 f / 27b25 | 7Cb10 ff / 
72a35 / Tial5 f 

— science 48a10 ; see also 

ph 

Nature, natural I 8, 12 ff / 
24b20 ff / 41al / 44b20 / 
52b15 | 53a5 | 65a5 | 
70b10 | 76al / 77b15 fF / 
81b20 / A 12 / et passim 

—=prime matter 29a30 

— and Art 34620 / 35al / 
62a15 / 75a20 

— compared to a carpenter 
30b15 | 43a25 

— — clay-modeller 30b25 

— — cook 76al f 

— — craftsman 31a20 / 
89b1 ff 

— — housekeeper 44b15 

— — painter 43b20 

— — runner 41b20 

— does nothing idly 39b20 / 
41b1 | 44a35 | 88b20 f 

vy, necessary I 5 ff / 

17al5- f / 17b35 / 42a15 | 
44a10, b10 / 67b10 / A 14 

—versus Better I 5 ff / 
31b20f / 38a30 ff / 39b25 / 
43435 ff / 55a20 / 76al5 
ff, b30 / 78a30 ff, b15 / 
82420 / 89a5 f, b1 ff 

Needham, J. x, xi / 33b20 / 
63b30 

net 34a20 

night-blindness 80a15 f 

north and south 67a10 / 
83a30 

Notidanus griseus 16625 

* nourishment ” 24b25 ff / 
40a25 ff | 76a25, b5 / 77a / 
86b1 

— fluid 53b25 / 67a30 

— grades of I 64 / 28a30 / 
40b30 f / 44b10 ff / 51b5, 
20 | 52b15 / 53b10 / 
62b15 f / 66a10 / 70a20 / 
77a5 

— stages of I 61 ff / 25a10 ff, 
b10 / 26b1 ff / 28a15 / 
40a20 / 65b25 f / 66a30, 
b5 f / 76a25 f / $4a35 / 
86b1 / B31 

* number * 78a5 / A 11-13 

observation, importance of 
viii / 60b30 / 88b10 ff 

Octopus 17a5 / 20b30 ff 

offspring, miitilated 21b15 / 
24al f 

— same or different in 
kind as parents 15a20ff / 
23b1 f 

oil 35b10 ff / 85a30 

oil-flotation 35b15 

olive and oleaster 55b10 

onion 61b30 

opposites (contraries) 24b1 / 
66a10 

optic nerves 44a10 

ore 35b15 / 61b15 

organ: see instrument 

** organizers * I 55 

Orpheus 34a15 

os uteri 39a30 f / T3al5 

ostrich 49b15 / 52b30 

ourion 53a20, 30, b5 

oviducts : see uterus 

Ovovivipara 18b30 / 20a15 

ovum, mammalian xii / I 77 / 
27b30 

ox 79a30 / 85b20 f 

ox-fish 16b25 

oysters 63a30 f 

603 

INDEX ye: 

painters 43b20 

** pangenesis ” 21b10 / 
64a10 ff / 66b10 / 69a10 

panspermia 69a25, b1 

parental care 53a5 ff 

parents, resemblance to, and 
identity in kind with 
15a20 

partridge 38b30 / 46b1 / 
49b10 f / 51al5 / 85b35 

“parts” I 6, 18 ff / l5al / 
16a10, b25 / 20b30 / 
26b5 | Slal5 

— instrumental 21a25 / 
34b25 / 39b15 / 42a35 ff 

— uniform and non-uniform 
I 19 ff / 15a10 / 21a25 / 
22a15 ff, b30 fF / 24b25 / 
34b25 / 40a15, b15 / 
43al1 / B a 

““ passages ”’ xvii / 43b35 ff / 
66b20 / 75al | 76b30 / 
81a20 f, b20 f / 82b1 / 
83al / B 30 ff 

— seminal 16b15 / 20a10, 
b10 / 21a10 / 87b25 ff 

mabos 1 6 / 22b30 / 34b30 / 
43b20 | 78a15 ff 

peacock 85b20 

pecten 63b10 

Pelseneer, P. 20b30 

perfect 32b30 f; see also 
animal; egg 

pericarp 22a15 

perineos 16a30 | 66a5 

Perinthus 73a25 

** period ’’ 38a15f / 77b15 fF / 
A1KASS 

pessary 39b5 

phlegma I 66 / 25a15 | 35b35 

dopa A passim 
Le nc RE 69b20 

604 

physiologers xvi / 41b10/ 
42a15 | 56b15 | 63b30 / 
69a5 / 78b5 

Big / sa / 56620) 
74b30 | 85 

pinna 63b5 

pipe 42a25 /88a20 

pipe-fish 55a30 a 

placenta xi / 54b30. 

plaiting of net 34a20 

plants v / I 5, 9, 52, 60 / 
17a20 / 18b10 | 22a10 / 
23b10 f | 24b15 | 25a20, 
b25 ff / 28a25, b35 f / 
32a10 / 35a15 / 38al, 
b30 / 39b35 / 40b10, 30 / 
41al f, 25, b35 / 50a20 ff 
52a15 f / 53b25 / 55b10 / 
57b15 ff / 59a5, b30 / 
6lal5 ff, b25 f / 62a5, 15 f / 
63b20 / 65b30 / 70b15 f / 
71b10 / 74b25 / 78b35 f / 
83a30, b10 f / 85a30/ A 1, 
18; B17 andn. 

— have no sexes 15b20 7 
3lal—b10 

— parasitic 15b25 / B uM, n. 

plaster 26b25 

Plato xii, xvi; xviii, xe LS | 
17a20 | 8ial 

Platt, Arthur xxviii, xxxii 

pneuma (incl. connate pneu- 
ma and breath) vi, xiv, 

xvi / I 31 f, 45, 46, 57, 63, 

68, 72 | 28a10, b25/ 35b10- 
36a15 | 37b30 / 38al / 
41b35-42a15 | 44al 
55a15 / 61b10 / 62a20, b15 / 
68b35 / 75b1 / 81a20 fF / 
86a5 / 89b5 f / B passim 

pneumatization I 63, 68 / 
Bi g3i, 323 

INDEX 

= eae ”~T11, 51 / 16bi1, 
‘10 / 40al ff / 41b15, 25 / 
42b1 ff / 51b5, 20 / 52a10 
ff / 62a25, b15 / 63b20 f / 
65b10 / 66a15, 25 f / 
78a5 / 88a10 f / et pas- 
sim 

— of male 57b10 
— of movement 15a5 / 
_, 3420 / 42b35 / 44230 
“* prior,’ ceeerne e sonee tt 
36a10 

pulsation 81a25 / B 31 

pupa 58b30 

papel 34b10 / 41b5 ~ 

purpura 61b30 / 63b5 

pus 77al0 

pushing and pulling B 20 f 

15a20, b25 

21a5 | 53a30 / 62a10, b25 / 
77al0 / 84b5 fF 

pygmies 49al 

Pyrrha 63b1 

quadrupeds, eggs of ovi- 
parous 52b30 ff 
qualitative change: see 
“ alteration ” 
quintessence vi; see also 
aither ; fifth element 

rain A 8 

raven 56b15 ff / 85b35 

reason I 44; see Soul, ra- 
tional 

* recapitulation ” x 

redundance of parts 70b25 ff 

regeneration 74b30 
“ relapsing” 68a15 ff 

rennet I 54 / 29a10 / 39b20 f / 
72a20 

reproduction A 17 

resemblance to parents 
21b20 ff / 22a15 ff / 26a10 / 
38b30 / 64b25 / 66b10 / 
67a35 ff / 69a5 ff / TOb5 

“residue” I 8, 20, 64 ff / 
15a20 / 19b30 / 24b25 ff / 
28b15 ff / 37al, b25 fF / 
39b1 / 43a25 / 45b15 f / 
49b1 ff / 62al f, bl ff / 
76b10 / 83a25 / B 13 

respiration 81225 

rhine 46b5 

rhinobates 46b5 

Rhodes 63a30 

Richards, H. xxviii 

Rickard, T. A. 35b15 

right hotter than left 65b1 

Rose, V. 19a10 

Ross, W. D. viii 

Rudberg, G. xxiii, xxx 

Rueff, Jacob 27b30 

sy ie ere J. Barthélemy- 

xxxii f 
Saint-Hilaire family xx 
salamander 61b15 
Sarmatia 83a10 
satyriasis 68b35 
Schmidt, J. p. 565 
Schneider, J. G. xxviii f 
Scot, Michael xxi, xxiii f, 
xxix ff 
Seythia 48a25 / 82b30 / 
83al10 

605 

INDEX 

sea 77b30 

seal (animal) 81b20 

seasonal change of colour 
86a30 

seasons 83b20 ff / A 14 

seasquirt 63b15 

sea-urchin 83a20 

seed-aggregate 69a25, b1 

Selachia 18b1, 30 / 19a5 f / 
32b1, 20 / 37b20 / 49al5, 
30 | 54020 fF / 55al0 / 
57al15 ff 

semen I 68 f / 16a5 f / 21a30 
ff | 24a10 fF / 26b1 fF / 
34b5 | 35a30 fF / 36a25 ff, 
b25 / 47a15, 35 ff | 66b5 / 
et passim 

— “collecting ” of 17b25 / 
18a5 / 73b35 

sense-perception 31a30 ff / 
32a10 / 36a30 / 41a10 ff / 
43a25 | 57b15 / 78b30 / B 
26 ff 

serpents 18a15 ff / 32b1 

serranus 41a35 and see ery- 
thrinus and channa 

“set” fetation, ete. I 54 / 
29b31 / 30a30 ff / 3lal5 f / 
33b20 / 37a20 / 39a5 

sex, origin of 63b25 ff / 
66a30 ff 

sex-characters, distinction be- 
tween primary and second- 
ary 16b5 / 78a25 ff 

sex-differentiation 63b20 ff 

sex-hormones 16b5 

sexual parts 66b10 ff 

Shakespeare I 65 

sheep 83a10 

** shift over ” 

shiny 35b25 

shoes 23b30 

606 

68a10 f 

sideshoots 61b30 ff 
sight, keenness of 79b35. aa fj 
— theory of, 79b20 ff / | 

8lal / B28... 
sinew 37b1 / 43al15 /. 87b10 f 
Siphae 41b1 / 61b5 ip 

skin 43b5 ff / 80a25 / 81b20 / 
82a25 fF / 85b1 fF |. 
sleep 78b20 fF 
sleep-walking 799al15. 
smell 81a10 : net 

** smoky ” vine 70b20 

snails 20b5 / 61a20 / 62a30 

snakes 70a20 f 

Solomon, Wisdom of 27b30 

solstice 48a25 t 

Soul I 16, 41 ff 51, 68 if 
22b20 | 26b20_ iam ve / 
34al, 10 f, b25 ff. 
35a5 ff / 36a25-37al5. / 
37a25 f / 38b20 f / 39a10 / 
40b30-41b5 ‘b1b5 | 
57b15 / 62a20, b15 / sin 17; 
B passim r 

— nutritive= generative, 7 
35al5 / 63b25 rr 

— rational 36b5-25 / 37a10 

sparrow 74b25 / 85b35 

spiders 58b5* 

spiral 81b15 

— shells 63a20 ‘ 

spontaneous eggs 56a15; see 
also wind-eggs 

— generation: see genera- 
tion 

Stadler, H. v 

stars 37al / 61a15 / 80b20; 
see also heavenly bolton 

Steno, N. ix 

strangury 83a20 

sublunary world 61b15 / A, 
2 ff ; 

- 

INDEX 

emapenies wth of teeth 
growth o 
88b10 ff 

Sun 85b10 © 

— as generator I 11, 51 / 
16al5 / 37al / 62b25 / 
77b20 ff / A 5 ff, 14; B13 

ating of milt 56a5, b1 ff 

swallows 74b25 f 

sweet substance 76a25 f 

swine 49al / 71a20 / 74b15 ff / 
Gabe / S81 + setts 

symmetria I 39 19b10 
23a30 / 27b10 / 29a15 | 
39b1 / 42b25 / 43a25 f / 
67al5 ff | 72a15 ff / 75b15 | 
Tikes / 79b25 | 80b20 / 

Synamats acus 55a30 
54 f 
rps ae a os 2lal / 22b35f/_ 
35a20 

taste 44a1 / B 30 
teeth 45a15 ff / 48b10 / 
8Sbi ff 

ir oa see also 

terminalogs xix, xxxiii / I 40 
et passim 

Testacea I 74 f / 6lal5— 
63b15 / B 17, n. 

— have no sexes 15b15 / 
20b5 / 31b5 

testes 17a10 ff / 19a30 ff / 
65a25 f / 87b25 ff 

Thompson, D. W. viii, xxx / 
49b25 f / 63b1 

Thomson, G. 63b30 

Thrace 82b30 

thratta 85b10 

time A 13 

tin 47b1 

Tipha 41a35 
tissue-disintegration 32a30 
tongue 86a20 f 

tortoise 20a5 / 32b1 

touch 44al / B 30 
tragaina T0b35 

' trees: see plants 

trochos 57al £ 

Truscott, S. J. 35b15 

Tschierschky, H. xxv 

tumour 24b25 

twins 64a30 ff / 72a35, b10 / 
75a20 - 

umbilicus 40a30 / 45b20 ff / 
5la5 | 52a25 ff | 53b15—- 
55al / 77a20 f / p. 369 

unevenness 72b5 / 78a5 / 
88a1, 25 / A 11 

unlimited 42b20 

upper and lower 41b25 ff / 
42b10 f / 43b15 

uterus (including oviducts) 
16b30 ff / 18a35 ff | 45b25 ff 
et passim 

vaginal discharge 28al 

vas deferens 18a10 

vena cava 38al0 

vine 25b25 f / 70b20 

violence : see force 

vipers 18b30 

Vivipara 18b25 / 28a5 

voice 76b15 / 81a25 / 86b5 fF / 
87b25 / B 31 

— breaking of 88a1 

von Baer, K. E. xii / 33b20/ 
36b1 

607 

INDEX 

Wachtler, J. xv 

wasps 59al jead ff / 70825 | 
86b1 

water 62a10, 20, b10 f / 
67a25 f / 86al f / B va 

wax 53b5 

weasel 56b15, 30 

weather: see climate, wind 

Wellmann, M. xvii, xxxvi / 
46a15 

whale 32b25_ 

whelk 61b30 / 63b5 

‘* whites ” 38a25 f 

willow 26a5° 

Wimmer, F. xxvii 

wind 67a10 | 77b30 / 83a30 | 
A8 

wind-eggs I 58 / 30a5, 30 / 

37a30 | 41a15 ff | 50b1 fF / 
51b25 / 57b1 spa 
wine 53a25 
withering 85a25 ff 
wolf 42a5 / 46a30 / 71020 [ - 
7T4b15 
Wolff, C. F. 33b20 iF 
Wolffian regeneration 74b30 
women, manner of life 75a30 f 

yawning 81a30 

yeast 177 / 55al5f 

yolk, liquefaction of during 
incubation 53b1, 25 eo 

— and white 51a30-52a5 [ 
53a35 | 54b20 ff 

yolk-sae stalk 53b20 / p. 369 

zephyrion 49b1 

Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. CrarK, Limrrep, Edinburgh, 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY 

VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 

LATIN AUTHORS 

AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS. J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols, 

APULEIUS. THE GOLDEN. ASS (METAMOR- 
PHOSES). W. Adlington (1566). Revised by S. Gase- 
lee. (6th Imp. 

Sr. AUGUSTINE, CONFESSIONS OF.‘ W. Watts 
(1631). 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Imp., Vol. II. 4th Imp.) 

ST. AUGUSTINE, SELECT LETTERS. J. H. Baxter. 

AUSONIUS. H.G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. 

BEDE. J. E. oa, 2 Vols. 

BOETHIUS: ACTS ayy DE CONSOLATIONE 
PHILOSOPHIAE. Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. 
Rand. (3rd Imp.) 

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. A. G. Peskett. (4th Jmp.) 

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. H. J. Edwards. (8¢h Imp.) 

CATO anv VARRO: DE RE RUSTICA. H. B. Ash and 
W. D. Hooper. (2nd Imp.) 

CATULLUS. F. W. Cornish ; TIBULLUS. J. B. 
ve aypj PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. J. W. 
M il. (11th Imp.) 

CELSUS: DE MEDICINA. W. G. Spencer. 3 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

CICERO: BRUTUS ann ORATOR. G. L. Hendrickson 
and H. M. Hubbell. (2nd Imp.) 

CICERO: DE FATO; PARADOXA STOICORUM; 

x 1 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

DE PARTITIONE ORATORIA. H. Rackham. (With 
De Oratore, Vol. II.) 

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. H. Rackham. (3rd~ Imp. 
revised.) 

CICERO: DE NATURA DEORUM anv ACADEMICA. 
H. Rackham. 

CICERO: DE OFFICIIS. Walter Miller. (4¢h Imp.) 

CICERO: DE ORATORE.  E. W. Sutton and H. 
Rackham. 2 Vols. 

CICERO: DE REPUBLICA ann DE LEGIBUS. Clin- 

ton W. Keyes. (2nd Imp.) 

CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE ig a DE 
DIVINATIONE. W.A. Falconer. (4th Imp.) 

CICERO: IN CATILINAM, PRO MURENA, PRO 
SULLA, PRO FLACCO. Louis E. Lord. 

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. E. O. Winstedt. 
3 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Imp., Vol. Il. 3rd Imp. and Vol. 
III. 2nd Imp.) 

CICERO: LETTERS TO HIS FRIENDS. Mh Glynn 
Williams. 3 Vols. (Vols. I. and IL. 2nd Imp. 

CICERO: PHILIPPICS. W.C. A. Ker. Qe 

CICERO: PRO ARCHIA, POST REDITU 
DOMO, DE HARUSPICUM RESPONSIS, * PRO 
PLANCIO. N.H. Watts. (2nd Imp.) 

CICERO: PRO CAECINA, PRO EGE MANILIA, 
Cop rgnehiary PRO RABIRIO. H. Grose Hodge. 
(2nd Lm 

CICERO: PRO MILONE, IN PISONEM, PRO 
SCAURO, PRO FONTEIO, PRO RABIRIO POS- 
TUMO, PRO MARCELLO, PRO LIGARIO, PRO 
REGE DEIOTARO. N. H. Watts. 

CICERO: PRO QUINCTIO, PRO ROSCIO AMERINO, 
PRO ROSCIO COMOEDO, CONTRA RULLUM. 

J. H. Freese. 

CICERO: TUSCULAN DISPUTATIONS. J. E. King. 
2nd Imp.) 

CICERO VERRINE ORATIONS. L. H.. G. Green- 
wood. 2 Vols. 

CLAUDIAN. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. 

COLUMELLA: DE RE RUSTICA. H. B. Ash. 2 Vols. 
Vol. I. Books I.-IV. 

FLORUS. E. S. Forster; and CORNELIUS NEPOS. 
J.C. Rolfe. 

2 

———— 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

FRONTINUS: STRATAGEMS ayn AQUEDUCTS. 
C. E. Bennett and M. B. McElwain. 

FRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols. 

GELLIUS. J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 

HORACE: aeere and EPODES. C. E. Bennett. (11th 

HORACE: § aTIRES, EPISTLES, ARS POETICA. 

( 

JEROME: S CT LETTERS. F. A. Wright. 

JUVENAL axp PERSIUS. G.G. Ramsay. (6th Imp.) 

LIVY. B. O. Foster, F.G. Moore, Evan T. Sage and A. C. 
Schlesinger. 13 Vols. Vols. I.-VII., IX.-XII. (Vol. I. 
3rd Imp., Vols. U1., III. and IX. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

LUCAN. J.D. Duff. (2nd Imp.) 

LUCRETIUS. W.H. D. Rouse. (5th Imp. — 

MARTIAL. W.C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 4th Imp., 
Vol. II. 3rd Imp. revised.) 

MINOR LATIN POETS: from Pustirus Syrvus to 
Routmivs Namatianvs, including Grarrius, Catpurnius 
Sicutus, Nemesranys, Avranus, with “Aetna,” “ Phoenix” 
a ee) poems. J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff. 

OVID: ithe ART OF LOVE axpv OTHER POEMS. 
J.H. Mozley. (2nd Imp.) 

OVID: FASTI. Sir James G. Frazer. 

OVID: HEROIDES axp AMORES. Grant Showerman. 
(3rd Imp.) 

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. 1. 7th Imp., Vol. Il. 6th Imp.) 

OVID: TRIST IA ayp EX PONTO. A. L. Wheeler. 
(2nd Imp.) ‘ 

PETRONIUS. M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCOLO- 
CYNTOSIS. W.H.D. Rouse. (7th Imp. revised.) 

PLAUTUS. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. (Vol. Il. 4th Imp., Vols. 
Il. and III. 3rd Imp.) 

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised 
W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Imp., vol 
Il. 4th Imp.) 

PLINY: NATURAL HISTORY. H. Rackham and 
W.H.S. Jones. 10 Vols. Vols. I, I. and UL 

PROPERTIUS. H. E. Butler. (5th Imp.) 

QUINTILIAN. H.E. Butler. 4 Vols. (2nd Jmp.) 

3 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

REMAINS OF OLD LATIN. E. H. Warmington. 4 
Vols. Vol. I. (Ennius and Caecilius). Vol. II. (Livius, 
Naevius, Pacuvius, Accius). Vol. III. (Lucilius, Laws 
of the XII Tables). Vol. IV. (Archaic Inscriptions). 

SALLUST. J.C. Rolfe. (2nd Imp. revised.) 

SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE. D. Magie. 
3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

SENECA: APOCOLOCYNTOSIS. Cf. PETRONIUS 

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. R. M. Gummere. 
3 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp., Vols. II. and III. 2nd Imp, 
revised.) 

SENECA: MORAL ESSAYS. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols. 
(Vol. II. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

SENECA: TRAGEDIES. F.J. Miller. 2Vols. (Vol. I. 
3rd Imp., Vol. II. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

SIDONIUS: POEMS AND LETTERS. W. B. Anderson, 
2 Vols. Vol. I. 

SILIUS ITALICUS. J.D. Duff. 2 Vols. (Vol. II. 2nd Imp.) 

STATIUS. J.H. Mozley. 2 Vols. 

SUETONIUS. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols, (5th Imp. revised.) 

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Sir Wm. Peterson ; and AGRI- 
COLA anny GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton. = Imp.) 

TACITUS: HISTORIES ann ANNALS. C. H. Moore 
and J. Jackson. 4 Vols. (Vols. I. and II. 2nd Imp.) 

TERENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 6th Imp., 
Vol. Il. 5th Imp.) 

TERTULLIAN: APOLOGIA ann DE SPECTACULIS. 
T. R. Glover; MINUCIUS FELIX. G, H. Rendall. 

VALERIUS FLACCUS, J.H. Mozley. (2nd Imp. revised.) 

VARRO: DE LINGUA LATINA. R.G. Kent. 2 Vols. 

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS ann RES GESTAE DIVI 
AUGUSTI. F. W. Shipley. 

VIRGIL. H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 15th Imp., 
Vol. Il. 12th Imp. revised.) 

VITRUVIUS: DE ARCHITECTURA. F. Granger. 2 Vols. 

eee 

0 tii 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

GREEK AUTHORS 

ACHILLES TATIUS. S. Gaselee. 

AENEAS TACTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS ann ONA- 
SANDER. The Illinois Greek Club. 

AESCHINES. C. D. Adams. 

AESCHYLUS. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4¢h Imp., 
Vol. II. 3rd Jmp.) 

APOLLODORUS. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols. (Vol. [. 

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. R.C. Seaton. (4th Imp. 
THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Kirsopp Lake.- 2 
(Vol. I. 5th Jmp., Vol. Il. 4th Imp.) 

APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Horace White. 4 Vols. 
ol. I. iy , Vols. II., III. and IV. 2nd Imp.) 
TUS. 4 Of CALLIMACHUS. — 

3 Vo 

ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 
(Vols. 1. and II. “4th Imp., Vol. Il. rd Imp.) Verse 
trans. 

ARISTOTLE: ART OF RHETORIC. J. H. Freese. 

(2nd Im: 

A : ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, EUDE- 
SASS ETHICS, VIRTUES anv VICES. H. Rackham. 
(2 ) 

ARISTOTLE: GENERATION OF ANIMALS. A. L. 

P. 
pe aber METAPHYSICS. H. Tredennick. 2 Vols. 

akisre VE: MINOR WORKS. W. S. Hett. On 

Cotourns, On Tuiycs Hearp, Puxysiocnomics, On 
Ox Manrvettous Turses Hearp, Mecuanicat 

Prostems, On Inprvistste Loxes, Srruations anp Names 
or Wixps, On Metissus, XENopHANES, AND GorcIAs. 

ARISTOTLE: NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. H. Rack- 
ham. (3rd Imp. revised.) 

ARISTOTLE: OBCONOMICA anp MAGNA MORALIA. 
G.C. Armstrong. (With Metaphysics, Vol.II.) (2nd Jmp.) 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE HEAVENS. W. K. C. Guthrie. 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE SOUL, PARVA NATURALIA, 
ON BREATH. W.S. Hett. (2nd Imp. revised.) 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON. H. P. Cooke and H. Tre- 
dennick. 3 Vols. Vol. I. 

6 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

ARISTOTLE: PARTS OF ANIMALS. A. L. Peck; 
MOTION AND PROGRESSION OF ANIMALS. 
E.S Forster. 

ARISTOTLE: PHYSICS. Rev. P. Wicksteed and F. M. 
Cornford. 2 Vols. te II. 2nd Imp.) 

ARISTOTLE: POETICS anp LONGINUS. W. Hamil- 
ton Fyfe; DEMETRIUS ON STYLE. W. Rhys 
Roberts. (4¢h Imp. revised.) 

ARISTOTLE: POLITICS. H. Rackham. 

ARISTOTLE: PROBLEMS. W.S. Hett. 2 Vols. 

ARISTOTLE: RHETORICA AD ALEXANDRUM. 
H. Rackham. (With Problems, Vol. IT.) 

ARRIAN: HISTORY OF ALEXANDER anv INDICA, 
Rev. E. Iliffe Robson. 2 Vols. 

ATHENAEUS: DEIPNOSOPHISTAE. C. B. Guliok. 
7 Vols. (Vol. V. 2nd Imp.) 

ST. BASIL: LETTERS, R. J. Deferrari.. 4 Vols. 

CALLIMACHUS ayn LYCOPHRON. A. W. Mair; 
ARATUS. G. R. Mair. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Rev. G. W. Butterworth. 
(2nd Imp.) 

COLLUTHUS. Cf. OPPIAN. @ 

DEMOSTHENES: DE CORONA anv DE FALSA 
LEGATIONE. C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince. (2nd 
Imp. revised.) 

DEMOSTHENES: MEIDIAS, ANDROTION, ARISTO- 
CRATES, TIMOCRATES, ARISTOGEITON. J. H. 
Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES: OLYNTHIACS, PHILIPPICS anp 
MINOR ORATIONS: I.-XVII. ann XX. J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES: PRIVATE ORATIONS. A. T. Mur- 

ray. 3 Vols. 

DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Es. 9 Vols, 
(Vols. I. and II. 2nd Imp.) 

DIO CHRYSOSTOM. 5 Vols. Vols. I. and Il. J. W. 
Cohoon. Vol. III. J. W. Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 

ant: SICULUS. C. H. Oldfather. 12 Vols 
Vols. I.-ITI. 

DIOGENES LAERTIUS. R. D. Hicks. 2 Vols. (Vol. 
I. 3rd Imp., Vol. Il. 2nd Imp.) 

DIONYSIUS OF HALICARNASSUS: ROMAN ANTI- 
QUITIES. Spelman’s translation revised by E. Cary. 
7 Vols. Vols, I.-IV. 

6 

a gidee 

—— 

~s 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

EPICTETUS. W. A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. 
EURIPIDES. A. S. Way. 4 Vols. (Vols. I. and II. 
6th ee Vol. III. 4th Imp., Vol. IV. 5th Imp.) Verse 

EUSEBIUS: ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. Kirsopp 
Lake and J. E. L. Oulton. 2 Vols. (Vol. Il. 3rd /mp.) 
eer me THE NATURAL FACULTIES. A. J. 

THE ip GREEK EK ANTHOLOGY. W. R. Paton. 5 Vols. . 
(Vol. I. 4th Imp., Vol. Il.-3rd Imp., Vols. III. and IV. 
2nd Imp.) 

THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, 

‘etl MOSCHUS). J. M. Edmonds. (6th Imp. 

revised.) 
GREEK ELEGY AND IAMBUS wrira tar ANACRE- 
ONTEA. J. M. Edmonds. 2 Vols. -(Vol. I. 2nd Imp.) 
GREEK MATHEMATICAL WORKS.» Ivor Thomas. 

2 Vols. 

HERODES. sae ee CHARACTERS. 

HERODOTUS. Godley. 4 Vols. (Vols, I.-III. 
8rd Imp., Vol. Vv For Imp.) 

HESIOD axpy THE HOMERIC HYMNS. UH. G. Evelyn 
White. (6th Imp. revised and enlarged.) 

HIPPOCRATES axyp tHe FRAGMENTS OF HERA- 
CLEITUS. W.H.S.Jonesand E. T. Withington. 4 Vols. 
(Vols. I., Il. and IV. 2nd Imp.) 

HOMER: ILIAD. A.T. Murray. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th 
Imp., Vol. II. 4th Imp.) 

HOMER: ODYSSEY. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 
5th Imp., Vol. U1. 6th Imp.) 

ISAEUS. E.S. Forster. (2nd Imp.) 

ISOCRATES. George Norlin and La Rue Van Hook. 
$3 Vols. Vols. I. and II. 

ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOA- 
SAPH. Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 
(2nd Imp. revised.) 

JOSEPHUS. H. St. J. Thackeray and Ralph Marcus. 
9 Vols. Vols. I.-VII. (Vol. V. 2nd Imp.) 

JULIAN. Wiimer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. (Vols. L. and IL. 
2nd Imp.) 

LONGUS: DAPHNIS anny CHLOE. Thornley’s Trans- 
lation revised by J. M. Edmonds; anp PARTHENIUS. 
S. Gaselee. (3rd Imp.) ~ 

7 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

LUCIAN. A. M. og pe 8 Vols. Vols. I.-V. (Vols. 
I. and II. 3rd Im LLG 

LYCOPHRON. af CALLIMACHUS. 

LYRA GRAECA. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 
3rd Imp., Vol. Il. 2nd Ed. revised and enlarged, Vol. LIL. 
2nd Imp. revised.) ; 

LYSIAS. W.R.M. Lamb. (2nd Imp.) 

MANETHO. W. G. Waddell. PTOLEMY: TETRA- 
BIBLOS._ F. E. Robbins. 

MARCUS AURELIUS. C.R. Haines. (8rd Imp. revised.) 

MENANDER. F.G. Allinson. (2nd Imp. revised.) 

MINOR ATTIC ORATORS. 2 Vols. Vol. I. ANTI- 
PHON, ANDOCIDES. K. J. Maidment. 

NONNOS: DIONYSIACA. W. H. D. Rouse. 3 Vols. 
(Vol. III. 2nd Imp.) 

pa va COLLUTHUS, TRYPHIODORUS. A. W 

air. 

PAPYRI. NON-LITERARY SELECTIONS. A. S. 
Hunt and C. C. Edgar. 2 Vols. LITERARY SELEC- 
TIONS. Vol. I. (Poetry). D. L. Page. (2nd Imp.) 

PARTHENIUS. Cf. DAPHNIS awn CHLOE, 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. W.H.S. 
Jones. 5 Vols. and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. 
Wycherley. (Vols. I. and III. 2nd Imp.) 

PHILO. 11 Vols. Vols. L.-V. F. H. Colson and Rev. G. 
H. Whitaker; Vols. VI.-IX. F. H. Colson. (Vol. IV. 
2nd Imp. revised.) 

PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. F.C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp., 
Vol. II. 2nd Imp.) 

PHILOSTRATUS: IMAGINES; CALLISTRATUS: 
DESCRIPTIONS. A. Fairbanks. 

PHILOSTRATUS ann EUNAPIUS: LIVES OF THE 
SOPHISTS. Wilmer Cave Wright. 

PINDAR. Sir J. E. Sandys. (6th Imp. revised.) 

PLATO: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES, HIPPARCHUS, 
THE LOVERS, THEAGES, MINOS anv EPINOMIS. 
W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: CRATYLUS, PARMENIDES, GREATER 
HIPPIAS, LESSER HIPPIAS. H. N. Fowler. (3rd 
Imp.) 

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAE- 
DO,PHAEDRUS. H. N. Fowler. (9th Imp.) 

8 

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

PLATO: LACHES, PROTAGORAS, MENO, EUTHY- 
DEMUS. W.R. M. Lamb. (2nd Imp. revised.) 

PLATO: LAWS. Rev. R.G. Bury. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.} 

age ina aa GORGIAS. W. R. M. 

PLATO: GeeUBLIC Pe Paul Shorey. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.) 

PLATO:. STATESMAN, PHILEBUS. H. N. Fowler; 
ION. W.R. M. Lamb. (3rd Imp.) 

i eyes iain eet anv SOPHIST. H. N. Fowler. 
3rd Imp. 

PLATO: TIMAEUS, CRITIAS, CLITOPHO,MENEXE- 
NUS, EPIST ULAE. Rev. RB. G. Bury. (2nd Imp.) 

PLUTARCH: MORALIA. 14 Vols. Vols. [.-V. F. C. 
ath Vol. VI. W. C. Helmbold ; Vol. X. H. N. 

owler. 

PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. B. Perrin. 
11 Vols. (Vols. I., I1., III., VI., VII. and XI. 2nd Imp.) 

POLYBIUS. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols. 

PROCOPIUS: HISTORY OF THE WARS. H. B. 

. 7 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp.) 

PTOLEMY: TETRABIBLOS. Cf..MANETHO. 

QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. A. S. Way. Verse trans. 
(2nd Imp.) 

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Rey. R. G. Bury. 3 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 2nd Imp.) 

SOPHOCLES. FF. Storr. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 7th Imp., Vol 
Il. 5th Imp.) Verse trans. 

STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. 
(Vols. I., V. and VIII. 2nd Imp.) 

THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. J. M. Edmonds: 
HERODES, etc. A. D. Knox. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Sir 
Arthur Hort. 2 Vols. 

THUCYDIDES. C.F. Smith. 4Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp., 
Vols. IL., III. and IV. 2nd Imp. revised.) 

TRYPHIODORUS. Cf. OPPIAN. 

XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Walter Miller. 2 Vols. 

' (Vol. I. 2nd Imp., Vol. Il. 3rd Imp.) 

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY. 
anpj SYMPOSIUM. C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd 
3 Vols. (2nd Imp.) 

9 

211052 
THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 

XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA ann OECONOMICUS. 
E. C. Marchant. (2nd Imp.) 
XENOPHON: SCRIPTA MINORA. E. C. Marchant. — 

VOLUMES IN PREPARATION 

GREEK AUTHORS 

ALCIPHRON. A. R. Benner and F. H. Fobes. 

ARISTOTLE: DE MUNDO, ete. W. K. C. Guthrie. 

ARISTOTLE: HISTORY OF ANIMALS. A. L. Peck. 

ARISTOTLE: METEOROLOGICA. H. D. P. Lee. 

at ae al EPISTLES, etc. N. W. and N. J. 
itt. 

LATIN AUTHORS 

S. AUGUSTINE: CITY OF GOD. J. H. Baxter, 

CICERO :] AD HERENNIUM. _H. Caplan. 
ICERO: PRO SESTIO, IN VATINIUM, PRO 
CAELIO, DE PROVINCIS CONSULARIBUS, PRO 
BALBO. J. H. Freese and R. Gardner. 

CURTIUS, Q.: HISTORY OF ALEXANDER. J. C. 

Rolfe. 
PRUDENTIUS. . H. J. Thomson. 

DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 

LONDON CAMBRIDGE, MASS. 
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD HARVARD UNIV. PRESS 
Cloth 10s. Cloth $2.50 

FA 2OIZ7 AP ori 
ARISTOTLE. 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, 
WITH AN ENGLISH 
AKK-9441 (AB) 

iy 
Fazer, sod 

Ngrayiee 
relents 

. 

Setyven te 
? aah it 
merit 
mp 

a 

Ns 
Bact 
ey tht 
ue 

tis 

3 
ptmiecepar teed 
ESOL OAEM SS 

ae 

wai | Gee 
ne 
reek 
ub reeaea 

uty 

“ 
eee 
aH “iy 
ve be er 

ats 
ts 294 
i 

hennee 

Ghat 
eG 

tee iene 

4 
Bin 
Bs a 
. cue igi 
alate 
Bn 
uy 

etn 
+ 

Pea ad 

ete tear, 

tay Peasttelr 

: aay 

' 
saat friday 

4 
Piatiae fe 
ares 
cay 
diie i) 

ath vw ue 

sheath ye Ea 

he 
nde 

Shs Ghani yayte 
aslghersSe 

1G 
Brig erty tcismabhe 

Ve nmE HLY pa 
Hoy 

‘ 
HS 

ae 
rs ty _ a $ 

t ae suki 

ol 

1setys? 
fant 
tapiveit i i 

as 

ts 
ue 

uate eH ot ifs 

ra pute nt 
ean 

et 

ae a 

ey vee HES 
‘ at si Hess 
5 ett 

pone urs. : 

aly 

rie 
sc 
ee aa 

at ies 

nih fie 

ees 
ene 

Sh a 
i 
oe 

a 

“f 
vg! a . 

ete 
ot nud 
Ren ‘ 

tet hat 
ny 

iets 

at 
hs 
ie 

Teeny 
sas 
4 git ate 

th 

nota 

shyt 
a 

a aH 

» 
sort 
fA aes 
eas we 
et aie Wis 
va ae 

ius 
sine ¥ 

tae 
pata 
ih ' 
sialyl 
rie 
BP gy 

oe GALLEN AE 

goby 

any 

wel 
Ae 

ae 

ete 
’ aR 

ste siveareet 

we 
rae 
oer 

band Shee uy Wd 

rte fie 

a brqae re 
TAMU 
atria 
Are us 
keno tas punt gt 

ca oae 
h 

ieee thai 

5 
Son iu 

, syed 
es fe vet r 
tenn 

is 
gated s 
1 

tH, oe Se aie rr 
BOeee 
a pe ee 

ster rerney 
Ma rae 

als 
ete 

ite 
raat apek et 

she wh eyed 
Pereira tise a 

Ayeig io arts 
a > te WER 

Tene SANS 

saute 

fie 

ve 

“a 
etal! Waist 
SS 

Santis as 
4 
4s 

hs 
Syrah, nah Brttt 
ty wtp Van ieveey a 

t 
ton 

Raiigett 
Fastiy aun eee 
43h raya 

ae } 

stat Pre ae ne 
Otani 
A 

se 
pirerot cone 
Terves 

3 ar 
RSL Neal carey ‘i 
Di traeiistacatas 4 

ay 

oe 

Tey hes: 

otis 
a 

tet tee 

ro i 
pit 4 
tad) 

tI 

ies et: 
Pies unemattieeed ei 
ne Vie } 

have 
ae grits 

wes. haere! 
nine ay 
a AL ARIEE Aah on Saal “ 
. © A 
" 

ol ad 

wee 
iets y 
ot
