m 

-CO 
•CD 

THE 

OF  ARIS7CT 

HO 

TRANSLATED    INTO    ENGLISH 

OECONOMICA 
ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

77 

A73 

1920 

Presented  to  the 
LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

MOFFATT  ST.  ANDREW  WOODSIDE 

1970 

OECONOMICA 

BY 

E.  S.  FORSTER 

M.A.,    LECTURER    IN    GREEK    IN    THE    UNIVERSITY    OF    SHEFFIELD 
FORMERLY    SCHOLAR    OF    ORIEL    COLLEGE 

OXFORD 

AT   THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1920 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

LONDON  EDINBURGH  GLASGOW  NEW    YORK 

TORONTO       MELBOURNE       CAPE    TOWN       BOMBAY 

HUMPHREY    MILFORD 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 

PREFACE 

THE  text  used  for  this  translation  is  that  of  F.  Susemihl 

(Aristotelis  qnac  fcrnntur  Occonomica,   Leipzig,  Teubner, 

*7)-     Mr.  W.  D.ROSS  has  read  through   the  translation' 

both  in  manuscript  and  in  proof  and  has  made  a  number  of 

valuable  suggestions  which  have  all  been  adopted. 

Of  the  two  Books  of  Oeconomica  which  have  come  down  to 
us  in  the  Aristotelian  Corpus  neither  can  be  regarded  as  the 
work  of  Aristotle  himself.    The  First  Book  contains  elements 
derived  from  Aristotle,  but  it  also  owes  a  good  deal  to  the 
Oeconomicus  of  Xenophon.1     It  appears  to  be  the  work  of  a 
Peripatetic  writer  who  was  a  pupil  either  of  Aristotle  himself 
or  of  a  disciple  of  that  philosopher.2     The  writer  was  clearly 
well  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Aristotle  and,  though 
his  doctrines  are  not  purely  Aristotelian,"  he  certainly  wrote 
at  a  date  before  the  Peripatetic  school  had  become  eclectic 
and  coloured  by  Stoic  influence  in  the  second  century  B.  c. 
The  Second  Book  is  evidently  of  a  different  character  and 
the  work  of  a  different  writer.     It  consists  of  an  Introduc 
tion,   which   divides    Economics    into    four    kinds,    Royal, 
Satrapic,  Political,  and  Personal—  a  division  quite  unknown 
to  Aristotle-  and  then  proceeds  to  relate  a  series  of  anec 
dotes  which  have  no  logical  connexion  with  the  introduction 
and  are   mainly  concerned  with   questionable  methods  of 
raising  money.     Several  of  those  about  whom  the  anecdotes 
are  related  lived  after  the  time  of  Aristotle.4  and  the  style 
of  the  writer  is  certainly  Hellenistic.     That  the  author  lived 
outside    Greece   proper    is  indicated   by  the  fact  that  his 
examples  are  mainly  derived  from  Asia  Minor,  Syria,  and 
Egypt. 

Susemihl  in  his  edition  adds  as  a  Third  Book  a  treatise 

Xenophon>s 

*""* 

!  e.g.  Economics  is  regarded  as  a  separate  science  from  Politics. 
bee  busemihl,  op.  at.,  pp.  xi  and  xii. 

PREFACE 

preserved  only  in  Latin  translations  dealing  with  the  position 
and  duties  of  a  wife  in  the  household.  The  author  of  the 
original  was  certainly  not  Aristotle,  but  it  has  been  con 
jectured  by  Rose.1  that  it  is  the  treatise  entitled  N6/zot 
dvSpos  KCU  yafjieTfjs,  which  figures  in  the  appendix  of  an 
anonymous  index  of  Aristotelian  works  extracted  from 
Hesychius  Milesius.  This  treatise  has  not  been  translated 
for  the  present  work. 

E.  S.  F. 
THE  UNIVERSITY,  SHEFFIELD. 

June  20,  1919. 

1  Aristoteles pseudepigr,,  p.  180  ff. 

BOOK  I. 
Ch.  i. 
Ch.  2. 
Chs.  3,  4. 
Ch.  5. 
Ch.  6. 

CONTENTS 

Economics  and  Politics. 

The  subject-matter  of  Economics. 

The  position  of  the  wife  in  the  household. 

The  treatment  of  slaves. 

The  qualities  of  the  Economist. 

BOOK  II. 

Royal,   Satrapic,    Political,   and  Personal  Economy, 
from  history. 

Examples 

OECONOMICA 

I      THE  sciences  of  politics  and  economics  differ  not  only  as  i343a 
widely  as  a  household  and  a  city  (the  subject-matter  with 
which  they  severally  deal),  but  also  in  the  fact  that  the 
science  of  politics  involves  a  number  of  rulers,  whereas  the 
sphere  of  economics  is  a  monarchy. 

Now  certain  of  the  arts  fall  into  sub-divisions,  and  it  does  5 
not  pertain  to  the  same  art  to  manufacture  and  to  use  the 
article  manufactured,  for  instance,  a  lyre  or  pipes  ;  but  the 
function  of  political  science  is  both  to  constitute  a  city  in 
the  beginning  and  also  when  it  has  come  into  being  to  make 
a  right  use  of  it.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  it  must  be  the 
function  of  economic  science  too  both  to  found  a  household 
and  also  to  make  use  of  it. 

Now  a  city  is  an  aggregate  made  up  of  households  and  land  10 
and  property,  possessing  in  itself  the  means  to  a  happy  life. 
This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that,  if  men  cannot  attain  this 
end.  the  community  is  dissolved.     Further,  it  is  for  this  end 
that  they  associate  together  ;  and  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
any  particular  thing  exists  and  has  come  into  being  is  its 
essence.     It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  economics  is  prior  in 
origin  to  politics  ;  for  its  function  is  prior,  since  a  household  15 
is  part  of  a  city.     We  must  therefore  examine  economics 
and  see  what  its  function  is. 

2      The   component    parts   of   a    household    are    man    and 
property.     But  since  the  nature  of  any  given  thing  is  most 
quickly  seen  by  taking  its  smallest  parts,  this  would  apply 
also  to  a  household.     So,  according  to  Hesiod,  it  would  be  20 
necessary  that  there  should  be 

First   and  foremost  a  house,  then  a  wife l  .  .   .  , 

1   Works  and  Days,  405. 
B 

i343a  OECONOMICA 

for  the  former  is  the  first  condition  of  subsistence,  the  latter 
is  the  proper  possession  of  all  freemen.  We  should  have, 
therefore,  as  a  part  of  economics  to  make  proper  rules  for 
the  association  of  husband  and  wife;  and  this  involves 
providing  what  sort  of  a  woman  she  ought  to  be. 

35  In  regard  to  property  the  first  care  is  that  which  comes 
naturally.  Now  in  the  course  of  nature  the  art  of  agriculture 
is  prior,  and  next  come  those  arts  which  extract  the  products 
of  the  earth,  mining  and  the  like.  Agriculture  ranks  first 
because  of  its  justice ;  for  it  does  not  take  anything  away 
from  men,  either  with  their  consent,  as  do  retail  trading 
and  the  mercenary  arts,  or  against  their  will,  as  do  the 

3°  warlike  arts.     Further,  agriculture  is  natural ;  for  by  nature 

i343b  all  derive  their  sustenance  from  their  mother,  and  so  men 

derive  it  from  the  earth.     In  addition  to  this  it  also  conduces 

greatly  to   bravery ;    for  it  does  not    make  men's    bodies 

unserviceable,  as  do  the  illiberal  arts,  but  it  renders  them 

5  able  to  lead  an  open-air  life  and  work  hard  ;  furthermore  it 

makes  them  adventurous  against  the  foe,  for  husbandmen 

are   the    only    citizens    whose    property    lies    outside    the 

fortifications. 

As  regards  the  human  part  of  the  household,  the  first  care  3 
is  concerning  a  wife ;  for  a  common  life  is  above  all  things 
natural  to  the  female  and  to  the  male.     For  we  have  else- 

10  where l  laid  down  the  principle  that  nature  aims  at  producing 
-many  such  forms  of  association,  just  as  also  it  produces  the 
various  kinds  of  animals.  But  it  is  impossible  for  the  female 
to  accomplish  this  without  the  male  or  the  male  without 
the  female,  so  that  their  cpmrnon  life  has  necessarily  arisen. 
Now  in  the  other  animals  this  intercourse  is  not  based  on 
reason,  but  depends  on  the  amount  of  natural  instinct  which 

15  they  possess  and  is  entirely  for  the  purpose  of  procreation. 
But  in  the  civilized  and  more  intelligent  animals  the  bond 
of  unity  is  more  perfect  (for  in  them  we  see  more  mutual 
help  and  goodwill  and  co-operation),  above  all  in  the 
case  of  man,  because  the  female  and  the  male  co-operate 

20  to  ensure  not  merely  existence  but  a  good  life.     And  the 

1  Cp.  Eth.  Nic.  n62a  i6ff.;  Pol.  1252*  26  ff. 

BOOK   I.  2-4 

I3431 

production  of  children  is  not  only  a  way  of  serving  nature 
but  also  of  securing  a  real  advantage  ;  for  the  trouble  which 
parents  bestow  upon  their  helpless  children  when  they  are 
themselves  vigorous  is  repaid  to  them  in  old  age  when  they 
are  helpless  by  their  children,  who  are  then  in  their  full 
vigour.     At  the  same  time  also   nature   thus  periodically 
provides  for  the  perpetuation  of  mankind  as  a  species,  since  25 
she  cannot  do  so  individually.     Thus  the  nature  both  of  the 
man  and  of  the  woman  has  been  preordained  by  the  will  of 
heaven  to  live  a  common  life.     For  they  are  distinguished 
in  that  the  powers  which  they  possess  are  not  applicable  to 
purposes  in  all  cases  identical,  but  in  some  respects  their 
functions  are  opposed  to  one  another  though  they  all  tend 
to  the  same  end.    For  nature  has  made  the  one  sex  stronger,  3° 
the  other  weaker,  that  the  latter  through  fear  may  be  the 
more  cautious,  while  the  former  by  its  courage  is  better  1344* 
able  to  ward  off  attacks  ;    and  that  the  one  may  acquire 
possessions   outside    the   house,    the   other  preserve  those 
within.     In  the  performance  of  work,  she  made  one  sex  able 
to  lead  a  sedentary  life  and  not  strong  enough  to  endure 
exposure,  the  other  less  adapted  for  quiet  pursuits  but  well  5 
constituted  for  outdoor  activities  ;  and  in  relation  to  offspring 
she  has  made  both  share  in  the  procreation  of  children,  but 
each  render  its  peculiar  service  towards  them,  the  woman  by 
nurturing,  the  man  by  educating  them. 

4  First,  then,  there  are  certain  laws  to  be  observed  towards 
a  wife,  including  the  avoidance  of  doing  her  any  wrong  ;  for 
thus  a  man  is  less  likely  himself  to  be  wronged.  This  is 
inculcated  by  the  general  law,  as  the  Pythagoreans  say,  10 
that  one  least  of  all  should  injure  a  wife  as  bein-  'a 
suppliant  and  seated  at  the  hearth '.'  Now  wrong  in 
flicted  by  a  husband  is  the  formation  of  connexions  outside 
his  own  house.  As  regards  sexual  intercourse,  a  man 
ought  not  to  accustom  himself  not  to  need  it  at  all  nor 
to  be  unable  to  rest  when  it  is  lacking,2  but  so  as  to  be 

1  Reading  in  1.  ii  with  Scaliger  and  Wilamowitz  <c/>'  eW«s  ,W> 
The  KO.™  vo^5  will  then  be  that  which  forbids  injury  to 
which,  says  the  author,  includes  injury  to  a  wife.     d<?£ 
can  scarcely  mean  '  torn  from  the  hearth  ' 
Reading  in  1.  14  with  some  MSS.  dmivros. 

B  2 

1344" 

OECONOMICA 

15  content  with  or  without  it.  The  saying  of  Hcsiod  is  a 
good  one : 

A  man  should  marry  a  maiden,  that  habits  discreet  he 
may  teach  her.1 

For  dissimilarity  of  habits  tends  more  than  anything  to 
destroy  affection.  As  regards  adornment,  husband  and 
wife  ought  not  to  approach  one  another  with  false  affccta- 
20  tion  in  their  person  any  more  than  in  their  manners  ;  for  if 
the  society  of  husband  and  wife  requires  such  embellishment, 
it  is  no  better  than  play-acting  on  the  tragic  stage. 

Of  possessions,  that  which  is  the  best  and  the  worthiest  5 
subject  of  economics  comes  first  and  is  most  essential— 
I  mean,  man.    It  is  necessary  therefore  first  to  provide  one- 

25  self  with  good  slaves.  Now  slaves  are  of  two  kinds,  the 
overseer  and  the  worker.  And  since  we  see  that  methods 
of  education  produce  a  certain  character  in  the  young,  it  is 
necessary  when  one  has  procured  slaves  to  bring  up  care 
fully  those  to  whom  the  higher  duties  are  to  be  entrusted. 
The  intercourse  of  a  master  with  his  slaves  should  be  such 
as  not  either  to  allow  them  to  be  insolent  or  to  irritate  them. 

30  To  the  higher  class  of  slaves  he  ought  to  give  some  share  of 
honour,  and  to  the  workers  abundance  of  nourishment. 
And  since  the  drinking  of  wine  makes  even  freemen  inso 
lent,  and  many  nations  even  of  freemen  abstain  therefrom 
(the  Carthaginians,  for  instance,  when  they  are  on  military 
service),  it  is  clear  that  wine  ought  never  to  be  given  to 

35  slaves,  or  at  any  rate  very  seldom.     Three  things  make  up 

the  life  of  a  slave,  work,  punishment,  and  food.     To  give 

them  food  but  no  punishment  and  no  work  makes  them 

I344b  insolent ;  and  that  they  should  have  work  and  punishment 

but  no  food  is  tyrannical  and  destroys  their  efficiency.     It 

remains  therefore  to  give  them  work  and  sufficient  food  ;  for 

it  is  impossible  to  rule  over  slaves  without  offering  rewards, 

and  a  slave's  reward  is  his  food.     And  just  as  all  other  men 

5  become  worse  when  they  get  no  advantage  by  being  better 

and  there  are  no  rewards  for  virtue  and  punishments  for 

1    Works  and  Days,  699. 

BOOK  I.  4-6  13441 

vice,  so  also  is  it  with  slaves.  Therefore  we  must  take 
careful  notice  and  bestow  or  withhold  everything,  whether 
food  or  clothing  or  leisure  or  punishments,  according  to 
merit,  in  word  and  deed  following  the  practice  adopted  by 
physicians  in  the  matter  of  medicine,  remembering  at  the  10 
same  time  that  food  is  not  medicine  because  it  must  be 
given  continually. 

The  slave  who  is  best  suited  for  his  work  is  the  kind  that 
is  neither  too  cowardly  nor  too  courageous.  Slaves  who 
have  either  of  these  characteristics  are  injurious  to  their 
owners  ;  those  who  are  too  cowardly  lack  endurance,  while 
the  high-spirited  are  not  easy  to  control.  All  ought  to  have  15 
a  definite  end  in  view  ;  for  it  is  just  and  beneficial  to  offer 
slaves  their  freedom  as  a  prize,  for  they  are  willing  to  work 
when  a  prize  is  set  before  them  and  a  limit  of  time  is 
defined.  One  ought  to  bind  slaves  to  one's  service  by  the 
pledges  of  wife  and  children,  and  not  to  have  many  persons 
of  the  same  race  in  a  household,  as  is  the  case  in  a  city. 
One  ought  to  provide  sacrifices  and  pleasures  more  for  the  ™ 
sake  of  slaves  than  for  freemen  ;  for  in  the  case  of  the 
former  there  are  present  more  of  the  reasons  why  such 
things  have  been  instituted. 

6  The  economist  ought  to  possess  four  qualities  in  relation 
to  wealth.  He  ought  to  be  able  to  acquire  it,  and  to  guard 
it ;  otherwise  there  is  no  advantage  in  acquiring  it,  but  it  is 
a  case  of  drawing  water  with  a  sieve,  or  the  proverbial  jar  25 
with  a  hole  in  it.  Further,  he  ought  to  be  able  to  order  his 
possessions  aright  and  make  a  proper  use  of  them  ;  for  it  is 
for  these  purposes  that  we  require  wealth.  The  various 
kinds  of  property  ought  to  be  distinguished,  and  those  which 
are  productive  ought  to  be  more  numerous  than  the  unpro 
ductive,  and  the  sources  of  income  ought  to  be  so  distributed 
that  they  may  not  run  a  risk  with  all  their  possessions  at 
the  same  time.  For  the  preservation  of  wealth  it  is  best  to  30 
follow  both  the  Persian  and  the  Laconian  methods.  The  Attic 
system  of  economy  is  also  useful ;  for  they  sell  their  produce 
and  buy  what  they  want,  and  thus  there  is  not  the  need  of 
a  storehouse  in  the  smaller  establishments.  The  Persian 

I3441'  OECONOMICA 

system  was  that  everything  should  be  organized  and  that 

35  the  master  should  superintend  everything  personally,  as  Dio 
said  of  Dionysius ;  for  no  one  looks  after  the  property  of 
others  as  well  as  he  looks  after  his  own,  so  that,  as  far  as 
!34511  possible,  a  man  ought  to  attend  to  everything  himself.  The 
sayings  of  the  Persian  and  the  Libyan  may  not  come 
amiss ;  the  former  of  whom,  when  asked  what  was  the  best 
thing  to  fatten  a  horse,  replied,  '  His  master's  eye  ',  while 
the  Libyan,  when  asked  what  was  the  best  manure,  answered, 
5  '  The  landowner's  foot-prints'.  Some  things  should  be 
attended  to  by  the  master,  others  by  his  wife,  according  to 
the  sphere  allotted  to  each  in  the  economy  of  the  house 
hold.  Inspections  need  only  be  made  occasionally  in  small 
establishments,  but  should  be  frequent  where  overseers  are 
employed.  For  perfect  imitation  is  impossible  unless  a 
good  example  is  set,  especially  when  trust  is  delegated  to 

10  others ;  for  unless  the  master  is  careful,  it  is  impossible  for 
his  overseers  to  be  careful.  And  since  it  is  good  for  the 
formation  of  character  and  useful  in  the  interests  of  economy, 
masters  ought  to  rise  earlier  than  their  slaves  and  retire  to 
rest  later,  and  a  house  should  never  be  left  unguarded  any 

15  more  than  a  city,  and  when  anything  needs  doing  it  ought 
not  to  be  left  undone,  whether  it  be  day  or  night.  There 
are  occasions  when  1  a  master  should  rise  while  it  is  still 
night ;  for  this  helps  to  make  a  man  healthy  and  wealthy 
and  wise.  On  small  estates  the  Attic  system  of  disposing 
of  the  produce 2  is  a  useful  one ;  but  on  large  estates,  where 

20  a  distinction  is  made  between  yearly  and  monthly  expendi 
ture  and  likewise  between  the  daily  and  the  occasional  use 
of  household  appliances,  such  matters  must  be  entrusted  to 
overseers.  Furthermore,  a  periodical  inspection  should  be 
made,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  is  still  existing  and  what 
is  lacking. 

The  house  must  be  arranged  both  with  a  view  to  one's 

25  possessions 3  and  for  the  health  and  well-being  of  its  in 
habitants.  By  possessions  I  mean  the  consideration  of 

1  Reading  in  1.  16  roie  rt  as  suggested  by  Sylburg. 

2  Cp.  !344b3l-3. 

n  KTi'junrn  is  here  used  in  a  very  wide  sense  since  it  includes  not  only 
produce  of  the  land  and  clothing,  but  also  slaves  and  even  guests. 

BOOK  I.  6  1345^ 

what  is  suitable  for  produce  and  clothing,  and  in  the  case  of 
produce  what  is  suitable  for  dry  and  what  for  moist  produce, 
and  amongst  other  possessions  what  is  suitable  for  property 
whether   animate   or   inanimate,    for   slaves   and    freemen, 
women  and  men,  scrangers  and  citizens.     With  a  view  to  30 
well-being   and    health,    the   house    ought    to   be   airy    in 
summer  and  sunny  in  winter.     This  would  be  best  secured 
if  it  faces  north  and  is  not  as  wide  as  it  is  long.     In  large 
establishments  a  man  who  is  no   use  for  other  purposes 
seems  to  be   usefully  employed   as  a  doorkeeper  to  safe-  35 
guard  what  is  brought  into  and  out  of  the  house.     For  the  I345b 
ready  use  of  household  appliances  the  Laconian  method 
is    a   good  one ;    for   everything  ought    to   have   its   own 
proper  place  and  so  be  ready  for  use  and  not  require  to  be 
searched  for. 

13451' 

4  AC 

Ik* 

*  v 

BOOK    II 

7      HE  who  intends  to  practise  economy  aright  ought  to  be  I 
fully  acquainted   with  the  places  in  which  his  labour  lies 
and  to  be  naturally  endowed  with  good  parts  and  deliber- 

10  ately  industrious  and  upright  ;  for  if  he  is  lacking  in  any 
of  these  respects,  he  will  make  many  mistakes  in  the 
business  which  he  takes  in  hand. 

Now  there  are  four  kinds  of  economy,  that  of  the  king 
(Royal  Economy),  that  of  the  provincial  governor  (Satrapic 
Economy),  that  of  the  city  (Political  Economy),  and  that 
of  the  individual  (Personal  Economy).  This  is  a  broad 
method  of  division;  and  we  shall  find  that  the  other  forms 
of  economy  fall  within  it. 

Of  these  the  Royal  is  the  most  important  and  the 

15  simplest,  the  Political  is  the  most  varied  and  the  easiest, 
the  Personal  the  least  important  and  the  most  varied.1 
They  must  necessarily  have  most  of  their  characteristics  in 
common ;  but  it  is  the  points  which  are  peculiar  to  each 
kind  that  we  must  consider.  Let  us  therefore  examine 

20  Royal  Economy  first.  It  is  universal  in  its  scope,  but  has 
four  special  departments — the  coinage,  exports,  imports, 
and  expenditure.  To  take  each  of  these  separately  :  in 
regard  to  the  coinage,2  I  mean  the  question  as  to  what 
coin  should  be  struck  and  when  it  should  be  of  a  high  and 
when  of  a  low  value  ;  in  the  matter  of  exports  and  imports, 
what  commodities  it  will  be  advantageous  to  receive  from 
the  satraps  under  the  Royal  rule 3  and  dispose  of  and  when  ; 
regard  to  expenditure,  what  expenses  ought  to  be  cur 
tailed  and  when,  and  whether  one  should  pay  what  is 

A*»n  T^  uxr,  *~*  * 
v»5i«vtt  >4f  :  SW-  ****•' 

>r  ll<AL  &cf-  />•*"*  V    'l  's  probably  right  as  applied  to  17  t'Siwrucf},  being  equivalent  to 
a 

sentence  is  clearly  corrupt.     No  mention  is  made  of  ;/  aa 
Tj,  and  TioiKiXwniTq  cannot  be  applied  both  to  i'j  7roXtn»cj}and  17  idioTi 

Reading  as  suggested  by  Bekker  iwcnov  nf 
s  iv  rt]  rayfj  in  1.  25  is  probably  corrupt. 

in  1.  22. 

BOOK  II.  i  i345i' 

expended  in  coin  or  in  commodities  which  have  an  equiva 
lent  value. 

Let  us  next  take  Satrapic  Economy.     Here  we  find 
six  kinds  of  revenue  :  from  land,  from  the  peculiar  products 
of  the  district,  from  merchandise,  from  taxes,  from  cattle,  30 
and  from  all  other  sources.    Of  these  the  first  and  most  im 
portant  is  that  which  comes  from  land  (which  some  call 
tax  on  land-produce,  others  tithe)  ;  next  in  importance  is 
the  revenue  from  peculiar  products,  from  gold,  or  silver, 
or  copper,  or  anything  else  which  is  found  in  a  particular  35 
locality ;    thirdly  comes  that  derived    from    merchandise ; 
fourthly,  the  revenue  from  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  and  i346a 
from  market-dues ;    fifthly,  that  which  comes  from  cattle, 
which  is  called  tax  on  animal  produce  or  tithe  ;  and  sixthly, 
that  which  is  derived  from  other  sources,  which  is  called 
the  poll-tax  or  tax  on  handicraft. 

Thirdly,   let    us   examine   the   economy  of  the   city.  5 
Here  the   most  important  source  of  revenue  is  from  the 
peculiar  products  of  the  country,  next  comes  that  derived 
from    merchandise   and    customs,1    and    lastly   that    which 
comes  from  the  ordinary  taxes. 

Fourthly  and  lastly,  let  us  take  Personal  Economy. 
Here  we  find  wide  divergences,  because  economy  is  not 
necessarily  always  practised  with  one  aim  in  view.  It  is  10 
the  least  important  kind  of  economy,  because  the  incomings 
and  expenses  are  small.  Here  the  main  source  of  revenue 
is  the  land,  next  other  kinds  of  property,-  and  thirdly  in 
vestments  of  money. 

Further,  there  is  a  consideration  which  is  common  to  all 
branches  of  economy  and  which  calls  for  the  most  careful 
attention,  especially  in  personal  economy,  namely,  that  the  15 
expenditure  must  not  exceed  the  income. 

Now  that  we  have  mentioned  the  divisions  of  the  subject, 
we  must  next  consider  whether,  if  the  satrapy  or  city  with 
which  we  are  dealing  can  produce  all,3  or  the  most  im 
portant  revenues  which  we  have  just  distinguished,  some 

1  17  Tri>6(To8os  f)  drro  TMV  di<iy(Dy&i>  is  apparently  equivalent  to  the  Siuyw- 
yiov  (portorium)  of  Polyb.  26.  7.  7. 

-'  Reading  with  Spengel  KT^/XUTCOI/  in  1.  13. 

3  Reading  with  Schneider  and  Bekker  anavra  («)  in  1.  19. 

I346a  OECONOMICA 

20  rather  than  others l  ought  to  be  employed.  Next  we  must 
consider  which  sources  of  revenue  do  not  exist  at  all  but 
can  be  introduced,  or  are  at  present  small  but  can  be 
augmented  ;  and  which  of  the  expenses  at  present  incurred, 
and  to  what  amount,  can  be  entirely2  dispensed  with  without 

25  doing  any  harm. 

We  have  now  mentioned  the  various  kinds  of  economy 
and  their  constituent  parts.  We  have  further  made  a  col 
lection  of  all  the  methods  that  we  conceived  to  be  worth 
mentioning,  which  men  of  former  days  have  employed  or 
cunningly  devised  in  order  to  provide  themselves  with 

30  money.  For  we  conceived  that  this  information  also  might 
be  useful ;  for  a  man  will  be  able  to  apply  some  of  these 
instances  to  such  business3  as  he  himself  takes  in  hand. 

Cypselus,  the  Corinthian,  having  vowed  to  Zeus  that,  if  2 
he  made  himself  master  of  the  city,  he  would  dedicate  to 
him  all  the  property  of  the  Corinthians,  ordered  them  to 
i346b  draw  up  a  list  of  their  possessions.     When  they  had  done 
so,  he  took  a  tenth  part  from  each  citizen  and  told  them  to 
trade  with  the  remainder.     As  each  year  came  round,  he 
did  the  same  thing  again,  with  the  result  that  in  ten  years 
5  he  had  all  that  he  had  consecrated  to  the  god,  while  the 
Corinthians  had  acquired  other  property. 

Lygdamis,  the  Naxian,  having  driven  certain  men 
into  exile,  when  no  one  was  willing  to  buy  their  possessions 
except  at  a  low  price,  sold  them  to  the  exiles  themselves. 
And  offerings  belonging  to  them  which  were  lying4  half 
10  finished  in  certain  workshops  he  sold  to  the  exiles  and 
any  one  else  who  wished  to  buy  them,  allowing  the  name 
of  the  purchaser  to  be  inscribed  upon  them. 

The  Byzantines  being  in    need    of  money   sold   the 
sacred   enclosures  belonging  to  the  state.5     Those  which 

1  Reading  as  suggested  bySusemihl  (TOVTOIS  p.a\\oi>  avriov  f/  fitt'ows, 

tj  (Kfivots  fiaXXov  q)  Tovrnis  in  1.  2O. 

2  Omitting  TU  in  1.  24  with  the  MSS. 

3  Reading   in   1.   30   eo-ri   yap    on    (Richards)   TOI'TOW    e<papp.6a-(i   rts 
(Sylburg)  ois  (Schneider)  av  avrbs  irpnynnTfvrjTai. 

4  Reading  with  Keil  dnoKtip.fva  in  1.  10. 

8  The  locus  classicus  on  such  enclosures  is  the  speech  of  Lysias  nto\ 

TOO   tTTJKOV. 

BOOK  II.  I,  2  i346b 

were  fertile  they  sold  on  lease,  and  those  which  were  un 
productive  in  perpetuity.  They  treated  in  the  same  way  15 
the  enclosures  which  belonged  to  associations  and  clans  and 
all  which  were  situated  on  private  estates  ;  for  the  owners  of 
the  rest  of  the  property  bought  them  at  a  high  price.  To 
the  associations  they  sold  other  lands,  viz.  the  public  lands 
round  the  gymnasium,  or  the  market-place,  or  the  harbour, 
and  the  places  where  markets  were  held  at  which  various  20 
commodities  were  sold,  and  they  gave  the  rights  over  the 
sea-fisheries  and  the  sale  of  salt,  and  the  stands l  where 
jugglers,  and  soothsayers,  and  druggists,  and  other  such 
persons  plied  their  trades  ;  but  they  ordered  them  to  pay 
over  a  third  of  their  profits.  And  they  sold  the  right  of 
'changing  money  to  a  single  bank,  and  no  one  else  might  25 
cither  give  money  in  exchange  to  any  one,  or  receive  it  in 
exchange  from  any  one,  under  penalty  of  forfeiting  the 
money.  And  whereas  there  was  a  law  amongst  them  that 
no  one  should  have  political  rights  who  was  not  born  of 
parents  who  were  both  citizens,  being  in  want  of  money 
they  passed  a  decree  that  a  man  who  was  sprung  from 
a  citizen  on  one  side  only  should  become  a  citizen  if  he 
paid  down  thirty  minae.  And  as  they  were  suffering  from 
want  of  food  and  lack  of  money,  they  made  the  ships  from  30 
the  Black  Sea  put  in  ;  but,  as  time  went  on,  the  merchants 
protested  and  so  they  paid  them  interest  at  ten  per  cent, 
and  ordered  those  who  purchased  anything  to  pay  the 
ten  per  cent,  in  addition  to  the  price.  And  whereas 
certain  resident  aliens  had  lent  money  on  mortgaged  I347a 
property,  because  these  had  not  the  right  to  hold  property, 
they  passed  a  decree  that  any  one  who  wished  could  obtain 
a  title  to  the  property  by  paying  a  third  of  the  loan  to  the 
state. 

Hippias,  the  Athenian,  put  up  for  sale  the  parts  of  the 
upper  rooms  which  projected  into  the  public  streets,  and  5 
the  steps  and  fences  in  front  of  the  houses,  and  the  doors 
which  opened  outwards.    The  owners  of  the  property  there 
fore  bought  them,  and  a  large  sum  was  thus  collected.     He 

1  Reading  as  suggested  by  Susemihl  TOIOVTOTPUTTUV  (TOVS  TOTTOVS)  in 
1.  22. 

J 

i347tt  OECONOMICA 

also  declared  the  coinage  then  current  in  Athens  to  be  base, 
and  fixing  a  price  for  it  ordered  it  to  be  brought  to  him  ; 
but  when  they  met  to  consider  the  striking  of  a  new  type 

10  of  coin,  he  gave  them  back  the  same  money  again.  And 
if  any  one  was  about  to  equip  a  trireme  or  a  division  of 
cavalry  or  to  provide  a  tragic  chorus  or  incur  expense  on 
any  other  such  state-service,  he  fixed  a  moderate  fine  and 
allowed  him,  if  he  liked,  to  pay  this  and  be  enrolled  amongst 
those  who  had  performed  state  services.  He  also  ordered 
that  a  measure  of  barley,  and  another  of  wheat,  and  an 

15  obol  should  be  brought  to  the  priestess  of  Athena-on-the- 
Acropolis  on  behalf  of  any  one  who  died,  and  that  the 
same  offering  should  be  made  by  any  one  to  whom  a  child 
was  born. 

The  Athenians  who  dwell  in  Potidaea,  being  in  need 
of  money  to  carry  on  war,  ordered  all  the  citizens  to  draw 

20  up  a  list  of  their  property,  each  man  enrolling  not  his  whole 
property  collectively  in  his  own  deme,  but  each  piece  of 
property  separately  in  the  place  where  it  was  situated,  in 
order  that  the  poor  might  give  in  an  assessment ;  any  one 
who  possessed  no  property  was  to  assess  his  own  person  at 
two  minae.  On  the  basis  of  this  assessment  they  contributed 
each  in  full  to  the  state  the  amount  enjoined. 

^5  Sosipolis  of  Antissa,  when  the  city  was  in  want  of 

money,  since  the  citizens  were  wont  to  celebrate  the  feast 
of  Dionysus  with  great  splendour  and  every  year  went  to 
great  expense  in  providing,  amongst  other  things,  very  costly 
victims,  persuaded  them,  when  the  festival  was  near  at  hand, 
to  vow  to  Dionysus  that  they  would  give  double  offerings 

30  the  next  year  and  collect  and  sell  the  dedications  for  the 
current  year.  Thus  a  substantial  sum  was  collected  for  the 
needs  of  the  moment. 

The  people  of  Lampsacus,  expecting  a  large  fleet  of 
triremes  to  come  against  them,  ordered  the  dealers  to  sell 
a  medimmis  of  barley-meal,  of  which  the  market  price  was 
four  drachmae,  at  six  drachmae,  and  a  cJions  of  oil,  the  price 
of  which  was  three  drachmae,  at  four  drachmae  and  a  half, 

35  and   likewise  wine  and   the  other  commodities.     The   in- 
13471)  dividual   seller   thus    received    the    usual    price,  while   the 

BOOK  II.  2  1347' 

city  gained  the  surplus   and   so  was  well   provided   with 
money. 

The  people  of  Heraclea,  when  they  were  sending  forty 
ships  against  the  tyrants  on  the  Bosporus,  not  being  well 
provided  with  money,  bought  up  from  the  merchants  all  5 
their  corn  and  oil  and  wine  and  the  rest  of  their  stores, 
fixing  a  date  in  the  future  at  which  they  were  to  make  the 
payment.     Now  it  suited  the  merchants,  better  to  sell  their 
cargoes  wholesale   rather  than   retail.     So    the   people   of 
Heraclea,  giving  the  soldiers  two   months'  pay,  took  the 
provisions  with  them  x  on  board  merchant-vessels  and  put  10 
an   official    in  charge   of  each  of  the  ships.     When  they 
reached  the  enemies'  territory,  the  soldiers  bought  up  all 
the    provisions   from    them.2     Thus   money  was   collected 
before  the  generals  had   to  pay  the   soldiers  again,  and 
so  the  same  money  was  distributed  time  after  time  until  15 
they  returned  home. 

When  the  Samians  begged  for  money  for  their  return 
home,  the  Lacedaemonians  passed  a  decree  that  they  would 
fast  for  one  day,  themselves  and  their  households  and  their 
beasts  of  burden,  and  would  give  to  the  Samians  the 
amount  that  each  of  them  usually  expended. 

The  Chalcedonians,  having  a  large  number  of  foreign  20 
mercenaries  in  their  city,  owed  them  pay  which  they  could 
not   give  them.     They  therefore   proclaimed    that   if  any 
citizen  or  resident  alien  had  any  right  of  seizure  against  any 
state  or  individual  and  wished  to  exercise  it,  they  should 
give  in  their  names.     When  many  did  so,  they  seized  the 
ships  which  sailed  into  the  Black  Sea  on  a  plausible  pretext,  25 
and  appointed  a  time  at  which  they  promised  to  give  an 
account  of  their  captures.     When  a  large  sum  of  money 
had  been  collected  they  dismissed  the  soldiers  and  submitted 
themselves  to  trial  for  their  reprisals,  and  the  state  out  of 
its   revenues    made    restitution    to    those    who    had    been  30 
unjustly  plundered. 

1  Reading  with  Kirchhoff  in  1.  9  SiSuvrfs  Stfirfvov  (j.urdui>  iraprpyov  <i/*« 
ri]v  nyopuv.     With  this  reading  we  have  an  example  of  the  common 
confusion  of  XX  and  /LI. 

2  An  early  example  of  a  Field  Force  Canteen. 

I3471'  OECONOMICA 

When  the  people  of  Cyzicus  were  at  variance  and 
the  popular  party  had  gained  the  upper  hand  and  the 
wealthy  citizens  had  been  imprisoned,  they  passed  a  decree, 
since  they  owed  money  to  their  soldiers,  that  they  would 
not  put  their  prisoners  to  death,  but  would  exact  money 
from  them  and  send  them  into  exile. 

35  The  Chians,  who  have*a  law  that  a  public  register  of 

debts  should  be  kept,  being  in  want  of  money  decreed  that 
i348a  debtors  should  pay  their  debts  to  the  state  and  that  the 
state  should  disburse  the  interest  from  its  revenues  to  the 
creditors  until  they  should  reach  their  former  state  of 
prosperity.1 

5  Mausolus,  tyrant  of  Caria,  when  the  king  of  Persia 

sent  and  ordered  him  to  pay  his  tribute,  collected  together 
the  richest  men  in  the  country  and  told  them  that  the  king 
was  demanding  the  tribute,  but  he  himself  could  not  provide 
it.  And  certain  men,  who  had  been  suborned  to  do  so, 
immediately  promised  to  contribute  and  named  the  amount 
that  each  would  give.  Upon  this  the  wealthier  men,  partly 

10  through  shame  and  partly  from  fear,  promised  and  actually 
contributed  far  larger  sums. 

On  another  occasion  when  he  was  in  need  of  money,  he 
called  together  the  Mylassians  and  told  them  that  their 
city,  which  was  his  capital,  was  unfortified  and  that  the 
king  of  Persia  was  marching  against  him.  He  therefore 
ordered  the  Mylassians  each  to  contribute  as  much  money 

15  as  possible,  saying  that  by  what  they  paid  now  they 
would  save  the  rest  of  their  possessions.2  When  a  large 
contribution  had  been  made,  he  kept  the  money  and  told 
them  that  at  the  moment  the  god  would  not  allow  them  to 
build  the  wall. 

Condalus,    a    governor    under    Mausolus,    whenever 
during  his  passage  through  the  country  any  one  brought 

20  him  a  sheep  or  a  pig  or  a  calf,  used  to  make  a  record  of  the 

1  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  all  debts  were  repaid  to  the  state 
by  private  debtors  instead  of  to  their  creditors,  and  the  state  then  paid 
interest  to  the  creditors,  thus  virtually  raising  a  loan  for  itself.    Many 
editors  emend  in  1.  3  to  cats  av  nn\  TO  ii^xnlov  «Wopjcra>trii',  '  until  they 
could  afford  to  pay  up  the  capital '. 

2  Reading  in  1.  15  ra  XCHTT'  («i>)  <r(?£d»  (Richards). 

BOOK   II.  2  1348* 

donor  and  the  date  and  order  him  to  take  it  back  home  and 
keep  it  until  he  returned.  When  he  thought  that  sufficient 
time  had  elapsed,  he  used  to  ask  for  the  animal  which  was 
being  kept  for  him,  and  reckoned  up  and  demanded  the 
produce-tax  on  it  as  well.  And  any  trees  which  projected 
over  or  fell  into  the  royal  roads  he  used  to  sell  as  profits.1 
And  if  any  soldier  died,  he  demanded  2  a  drachma  as  a  toll  25 
for  the  corpse  passing  the  gates  ;  and  so  he  not  only 
received  money  from  this  source,  but  also  the  officers  could 
not  deceive  him  as  to  the  date  of  the  soldier's  death.  Also, 
noticing  that  the  Lycians  were  fond  of  wearing  their  hair 
long,  he  pretended  that  a  dispatch  had  come  from  the  king 
of  Persia  ordering  him  to  send  hair  to  make  false  fringes  30 
and  that  he  was  therefore  commanded  by  Mausolus  to  cut 
off  their  hair.  He  therefore  said  that,  if  they  would  pay 
him  a  fixed  poll-tax,  he  would  send  for  hair  to  Greece. 
They  gladly  gave  him  what  he  asked,  and  a  large  sum  of 
money  was  collected  from  a  great  number  of  them. 

Aristotle,  the  Rhodian,  who  was  governor  of  Phocaea,  35 
was  in  want  of  money.     Perceiving  therefore  that  there 
were  two  parties  amongst  the  Phocaeans,  he  made  secret  i348b 
overtures  to  one  party  saying  that  the  other  faction  was 
offering  him  money  on  condition  that  he  would  turn  the 
scale  in  their  favour,  but  that  for  his  own  part  he  would 
rather  receive  money  from  them  and  give  the  direction  of 
affairs  into  their  hands.     When  they  heard  this,  those  who 
were  present  immediately  gave  him  the  money,  supplying  5 
him  with  all  he  asked  for.    He  then  went  to  the  other  party 
and  showed  them  what  he  had  received  from  their  opponents  ; 
whereupon  they  also  professed  their  willingness  to  give  him 
an  equal  sum.     So  he  took  the  money  from  both  parties 
and  reconciled  them  one  with  another.    Also,  noticing  that 
there  was  much  litigation  among  the  citizens  and  that  there  10 
were  grievances  of  long  standing  among  them  owing  to  war, 
he  established  a  court  of  law  and  proclaimed  that  unless 
they  submitted  their  cases  to  judgement  within  a  period3 

is  here  used  in  its  wider  sense  of  '  profits  '  ;  in  1.  23  it 
has  the  special  sense  of  '  tax  on  animal  produce  ',  as  in  1346*2. 

2  Reading  in  1.  26  8tcnrii\i.oi>  enparrt  (Scaliger). 

3  Reading  in  1.  12  xpovov  (Richards). 

I3481'  OKCONOMICA 

which  he  appointed,  there  would  be  no  further  settlement 
of  their  former  claims.  Then  getting  control  of  the  deposits 
paid  in  a  number  of  suits,  and  the  cases  which  were  subject 

15  to  appeal  with  damages1,  and  receiving  money  from  both 
parties  by  other  means,  he  collected  a  large  sum. 

The  Clazomenians,  when  they  were  suffering  from 
famine  and  were  in  want  of  money,  decreed  that  private 
individuals  who  had  any  olive  oil  should  lend  it  to  the  state, 
which  would  pay  them  interest.  Now  olives  are  abundant 

20  in  this  country.  When  the  owners  had  lent  them  the  oil, 
they  hired  ships  and  sent  it  to  the  marts  from  which  their 
corn  came,  giving  the  value  of  the  oil  as  a  pledge.  And 
when  they  owed  pay  to  their  soldiers  to  the  amount  of 
twenty  talents  and  could  not  provide  it,  they  paid  the 
generals  four  talents  a  year  as  interest.  But  finding  that 
they  did  not  reduce  the  principal  and  that  they  were 

25  continually  spending  money  to  no  purpose,  they  struck  an 
iron  coinage  to  represent  a  sum  of  twenty  talents  of  silver, 
and  then  distributing  it  among  the  richest  citizens  in 
proportion  to  their  wealth  they  received  in  exchange  an 
equivalent  sum  in  silver.  Thus  the  individual  citizens  had 
money  to  disburse  for  their  daily  needs  and  the  state  was 

3o  freed  from  debt.  They  then  paid  them  interest  out  of  their 
revenues  and  continually  divided  it  up  and  distributed  it  in 
proper  proportions,  and  called  in  the  iron  coinage. 

The  Selybrians  were  once  in  need  of  money ;  and  so, 
as  they  had  a  law  which  forbade  the  export  of  corn  to 
another  state2  which  was  suffering  from  famine,  and  they 

35  had  a  supply  of  last  season's  corn,  they  passed  a  decree  that 

private  persons  should  hand  over  their  corn  to  the  state  at 

i349a  a  fixed  price,  each  reserving  a  year's  supply ;    they  then 

allowed  any  one  who  wished  to  export  his  supply,  fixing 

a  price  which  they  thought  would  give  them  a  profit. 

The  people  of  Abydos,  when  their  land  was  untilled 
owing  to  political  dissensions  and  the  resident  aliens  were 
paying  them  nothing  because  they  still  owed  them  money, 

5  passed  a  decree  that  any  one  who  was  willing  should  lend 

1  Reading  uc/>'  tnvrw  for  «'(/>'  tnvrov  in  1.  14. 
•  Reading  with  Keil  (ro<V  aXXo(r)  eV  in  1.  34. 

BOOK  II.  2  I3498 

money  to  the  farmers  in  order  that  they  might  till  the  soil, 
providing  that  they  should  enjoy  the  first-fruits  of  the  crop 
and  that  the  others  should  have  what  remained. 

The  Ephesians,  being  in  need  of  money,  made  a  law 
that  their  women  should  not  wear  gold  ornaments,  but  10 
should  lend  to  the  state  what  they  already  possessed  ;  and 
fixing  the  amount  which  was  to  be  paid  they  allowed  the 
name  of  any  one  who  presented  that  sum  to  be  inscribed 
as  that  of  the  dedicator  on  certain  of  the  pillars  in  the 
temple. 

Dionysius  of  Syracuse,  wishing  to  collect  money, 
called  together  an  assembly  and  declared  that  Demeter  had  15 
appeared  to  him  and  bade  him  bring  the  ornaments  of  the 
women  to  her  temple..  He  had  therefore,  he  said,  done  so 
with  the  ornaments  of  the  women  of  his  own  household ; 
and  he  demanded  that  every  one  else  should  do  the  same, 
lest  vengeance  from  the  goddess  should  fall  upon  them. 
Any  one  who  refused  would,  he  said,  be  guilty  of  sacrilege. 
When  all  had  brought  what  they  possessed  through  fear  of  20 
the  goddess  and  dread  of  Dionysius,  after  dedicating  the 
ornaments  to  the  goddess  he  then  appropriated  them,  saying 
that  they  were  lent  to  him  by  her.  And  when  some  time 
had  elapsed  and  the  women  began  wearing  ornaments  again, 
he  ordered  that  any  woman  who  wished  to  wear  jewellery  of 
gold  should  dedicate  a  fixed  sum  in  the  temple. 

And  when  he  was  intending  to  build  triremes,  he  knew  25 
that  he  would  be  in  want  of  money.  He  therefore  called 
together  an  assembly  and  said  that  a  certain  city  was  to  be 
betrayed  to  him  and  that  he  needed  money  for  this  purpose. 
He  therefore  asked  the  citizens  to  contribute  two  staters 
each  ;  and  they  did  so.  He  then  let  two  or  three  days 
elapse,  and  pretending  that  he  had  failed  in  his  attempt,  after 
commending  their  generosity  he  gave  every  man  his  contri 
bution  back  again.  By  this  action  he  won  the  hearts  of  the  30 
citizens.  And  so  they  again  contributed,  thinking  that  they 
would  receive  their  money  back  again  ;  but  he  took  the 
money  and  kept'  it  for  building  his  ships. 

And  when  he  was  in  need  of  money  he  struck  a  coinage 
of  tin,  and  calling  an  assembly  together  he  spoke  at  great 

I349ft  OECONOMICA 

35  length  in  favour  of  the  money  which  had  been  coined  ;  and 
they,  even  against  their  will,  decreed  that  every  one1  should 
regard  any  of  it  that  he  accepted  as  silver  and  not  as  tin. 

On  another  occasion,  being  in  want  of  money,  he  asked 
i349b  the  citizens  to  give  him  contributions ;  but  they  declared 
that  they  had  nothing  to  give.  Accordingly  he  brought  out 
his  own  household  goods  and  offered  them  for  sale,  as 
though  compelled  to  do  so  by  poverty.  When  the  Syracusans 
bought  them,  he  kept  a  record  of  what  each  had  bought, 

5  and  when  they  had  paid  the  price,  he  ordered  each  of  them 
to  bring  back  the  articles  which  he  had  bought. 

And  when  the  citizens  owing  to  the  taxes  could  not  keep 
cattle,  he  said  that  he  had  enough  up  to  the  present  ;  those 
therefore  who  kept  cattle  should  now.be  free  from  a  tax  on 
them.  But  since  many  soon  acquired  a  large  number  of 
cattle,  thinking  that  they  could  keep  them  without  paying 

10  a  tax  on  them,  when  he  thought  that  a  fitting  moment  had 
come  he  gave  orders  that  they  should  assess  their  value  and 
then  imposed  a  tax.  Accordingly  the  citizens,  angry  at 
having  been  deceived,  slew  their  cattle  and  sold  them.  And 
when,  to  prevent  this,  he  ordered  them  to  kill  only  as  many 
as  were  needed  for  daily  use,  they  next  devoted  them  for 
sacrifice  to  the  gods.  Dionysius  then  forbade  them  to 
sacrifice  any  female  beast. 

On  another  occasion  when  he  was  in  need  of  money,  he 

1 5  ordered  all  families  of  orphans  to  enrol  themselves;  and 
when  many2 had  done  so,  he  enjoyed  their  property  until 
each  member  of  such  families  came  of  age. 

And  after  he  had  captured  Rhegium  he  called  an 
assembly  of  the  inhabitants  together  and  informed  them 
that  he  would  be  quite  justified  in  enslaving  them,  but  under 

ao  the  circumstances  he  would  let  them  go  free  if  he  received  the 
amount  which  he  had  spent  on  the  war  and  three  minae  a  head 
from  all  of  them.  The  Rhegians  then  brought  to  light  the 
wealth  which  before  had  been  hidden,  and  the  poor  borrowed 
from  the  richer  citizens  and  from  foreigners  and  provided 

»5  the  sum  which  he  demanded.     When  he  had  received  it 

1  Reading  tKavrw  (Richards)  in  1.  35. 

2  Reading  with  Schneider  no\\u>v  for  ii\\u>v  in  1.  16. 

BOOK  II.  2  i349b 

from  them  he  nevertheless  sold  them  all  as  slaves,  and  seized 
all  the  treasures  which  had  before  been  hidden  and  were 
now  brought  to  light. 

Also  having  borrowed  money  from  the  citizens  under 
promise  of  repayment,  when  they  demanded  it  back  he 
ordered  them  to  bring  him  whatever  money  any  of  them 
possessed,  threatening  them  with  death  as  the  penalty  if 
they  failed  to  do  so.  When  the  money  had  been  brought,  he  30 
issued  it  again  after  stamping  it  afresh  so  that  each  drachma 
had  the  value  of  two  drachmae,  and  paid  back  the  original 
debt  and  the  money  which  they  brought  him  on  this 
occasion.1 

And  when  he  sailed  against  Tyrrhenia  with  a  hundred 
ships  he  took  much  gold  and  silver  and  a  considerable 
quantity  of  other  ornaments  of  all  kinds  from  the  temple  of 
Leucothea.  And  knowing  that  the  sailors  too  were  keeping  35 
many  things  for  themselves,  he  made  a  proclamation  that 
every  one  should  bring  him  the  half  of  what  he  had  and  i35oa 
might  retain  the  other  half;  and  he  threatened  with  death 
any  one  who  failed  to  deliver  up  the  half.  The  sailors, 
supposing  that  if  they  gave  up  the  half  they  would  be 
allowed  undisturbed  possession  of  the  rest,  did  so  ;  but 
Dionysius,  when  he  had  received  it,  ordered  them  to  go 
back  and  bring  him  the  other  half.  5 

The  Mendaeans  used  the  proceeds  of  their  harbour 
customs  and  their  other  dues  for  the  administration  of  their 
city,  but  did  not  exact  the  taxes  on  land  and  houses ;  but 
they  kept  a  register  of  property-owners,  and  whenever  they 
needed  money,  those  who  owed  taxes  paid  them.  They  10 
thus  profited  during  the  time  which  elapsed  by  having  full 
use  of  the  money  without  paying  interest. 

When  they  were  at  war  with  the  Olynthians  and  needed 
money,   seeing   that    they   had    slaves   they   decreed    that 
a  female  and  a  male  slave  should  be  left  to  each  citizen  and 
the  rest  sold,  so  that  private  individuals  might  lend  money  15 
to  the  state.2 

Callistratus,   when  the   harbour-dues    in    Macedonia 

)  Reading  m  1.  32  as  suggested  by  Susemihl  <,ijre'«ai«  «,!  t  ,w> 
ainjvtynav. 

2  Reading  i?  rfi  -n6\ti  for  777  m>\ei  <W  in  1.  14. 

c  a 

i35oa  OECONOMICA 

were  usually  sold  at  twenty  talents,  made  them  fetch  double 
that  price.  For,  noticing  that  the  richer  men  always  bought 
them  because  it  was  necessary  that  the  sureties  provided 
20  for  the  twenty  talents  should  be  possessed  of  one  talent,  he 
proclaimed  that  any  one  who  liked  could  purchase  them  and 
that  sureties  should  be  provided  for  only  a  third  or  any 
other  proportion  which  l  he  could  persuade  them  each  to 
guarantee. 

Timothcus,  the  Athenian,  when  he  was  at  war  with 
the  Olynthians,  and   in   need  of  money,  struck  a  bronze 
25  coinage  and  distributed  it  to  the  soldiers.     When  they  pro 
tested,  he  told  them  that  the  merchants  and  retailers  would 
all  sell  their  goods  on  the  same  terms  as  before.     He  then 
told  the  merchants,  if  they  received  any  bronze  money,  to 
use  it  again  to  buy  the  commodities  sent  in  for  sale  from 
the  country  arid  anything  which  was  brought  in  as  plunder, 
and  said  that,  if  they  brought  him  any  bronze  money  which 
they  had  left  over,  they  should  receive  silver  for  it. 
30      When   he   was    making   war   in    the   neighbourhood   of 
Corcyra    and    was    in    difficulties,    and    the   soldiers   were 
demanding    their    pay    and    refusing    to    obey    him    and 
threatening  to  go  over2  to  the  enemy,  he  called  together 
an  assembly  and  told  them  that  no  money  could  reach  him 
35  owing  to  the  stormy  weather,  for  he  had,  he  declared,  such 
an  abundance  of  supplies  that  he  offered  them  as  a  free  gift 
the  three  months'  rations  which  they  had  already  received. 
1350^  They,  supposing  that  Timotheus  would  never  have  made 
such  a  valuable  concession  unless  he  really  expected  the 
money,  kept   silence   about  the  pay;    and   he  meanwhile 
achieved  the  objects  which  he  had  in  view. 

When  he  was  besieging  Samos  he  actually  sold  to  the 

6  inhabitants  the  fruits  and  the  produce  of  their  lands,  and 

so  had  abundance  of  money  to  pay  his  soldiers.   And  when 

there  was  a  shortage  of  provisions  in  the  camp  owing  to 

the  arrival  of  newcomers,  he  forbade  the  sale  of  corn  ready 

ground,  and  of  any  smaller  measure  than  a  medinmus,  and 

10  of  any  liquid  in  a  smaller  quantity  than  a  mctreta.     Accord- 

1   Reading  tad'  OTTOVOV  (av}  fKaamvs  (Richards)  in  1.  21. 
"  Reading  Cmonopfixrtnflm  (Richards)  in  1.  33. 

BOOK  II.  2  1350^ 

ingly  the  commanders  of  divisions  and  companies  bought 
up  provisions  wholesale  and  distributed  them  to  the  soldiers, 
while  the  newcomers  brought  their  own  provisions  with  them 
and,  when  they  departed,  sold  anything  that  they  had  left. 
The  result  was  that  the  soldiers  had  an  abundance  of 
provisions.  , . 

Didales,  the  Persian,  having  soldiers  under  his  com 
mand,  could  supply  their  daily  needs  from  the  enemy's 
country,  but  having  no  money  to  give  them,  and  being 
requested  to  pay  them,  when  the  time  came  at  which  it  was 
due  he  devised  the  following  plan.  He  called  together  an 
assembly  and  told  them  that  he  had  no  lack  of  money,  but  20 
that  it  was  in  a  certain  place  which  he  named.  He  there 
fore  moved  his  camp  and  started  to  march  thither.  Then 
when  he  was  near  the  place,  he  went  in  advance  to  it  and 
took  from  the  temples  there  all  the  embossed  silver  plate 
which  they  contained.  He  then  loaded  his  mules  so  that 
the  silver  plate  was  visible,  and  they  looked  as  though  they 
were  carrying  solid  silver.  The  soldiers,  when  they  saw  it,  25 
thought  that  the  loads  were  all  solid  silver  and  were  en 
couraged,  thinking  that  they  would  receive  their  pay.  But 
Didales  told  them  that  he  must  go  to  Amisus  and  have 
the  silver  minted.  Now  the  journey  to  Amisus  was  one  of 
many  days  and  exposed  to  the  weather.  So  all  this  time 
he  made  use  of  the  army,  merely  giving  them  their  rations. 

He  kept  in  his  personal  service  all  the  skilled  artificers  30 
in  the  army  and  the  retailers  who  carried  on  traffic  in  any 
commodity  ;  and  no  one  else  was  permitted  to  do  any  of 
these  things. 

Chabrias.  the  Athenian,  advised  Taus,  king  of  Egypt, 
when  he  was  starting  on  a  warlike  expedition  and  was  in 
need   of  money,  to  say  to  the  priests  that  owing   to  the  35 
expense  some  of  the  temples  and  the  majority  of  the  priests 
must  be  dispensed  with.     When  the  priests  heard  this,  each  i35i!l 
wishing  to  retain  their  own  temple,  they  privately  offered 
him l  money.     And  when  Taus  had  accepted  money  from 
all  of  them,  Chabrias  advised  him  to  order  them  to  expend 

f   l  Reading  m  1.  2  Idia  (cp.  I352b23)  with  Scaliger  and  Schneider  for 
iow,  and  «£r<j)  with  Sylburg  and  Schneider  for  avrols. 

C3 

i35ia  OECONOMICA 

a  tenth  part  of  the  amount  which  they  formerly  spent  on 
5  their  temple ]  and  to  lend  the  rest  to  him  until  the  war 
against  the  king  of  Persia  should  come  to  an  end.  And  he 
advised  him  to  fix  the  necessary  amount  and  demand  a 
contribution  from  each  household  and  likewise  from  each 
individual ;  and  that,  when  corn  was  sold,  the  buyer  and 
the  seller  should  give  an  obol  for  each  artabe  over  and 
10  above  the  price  ;  and  that  he  should  demand  the  payment 
of  a  tenth  part  of  the  profits  derived  from  shipping  and 
manufactures  and  any  other  form  of  industry.  And  he 
advised  him,  when  he  was  leaving  the  country  on  an  ex 
pedition,  to  order  that  any  unminted  silver  or  gold  which 
any  one  possessed  should  be  brought  to  him :  and  when 
15  most  people  brought  it,  he  advised  him  to  make  use  ot  it 
and  to  commend  the  lenders  to  the  provincial  governors  so 
that  they  might  repay  them  out  of  the  taxes. 

Iphicrates,  the  Athenian,  when  Cotys  had  collected 
an  army,  provided  him  with  money  in  the  following  way. 
20  He  advised  him  to  order  the  men  under  his  command  to 
sow  land  for  him  with  three  medinmi  of  corn.  The  result 
of  this  was  that  a  great  quantity  of  corn  was  collected. 
Accordingly  he  brought  it  down  to  the  markets  and  sold  it, 
and  thus  gained  an  abundance  of  money. 

Cotys,  the  Thracian,  tried  to  borrow  money  from  the 
as  Peirinthians  so  that  he  might  collect  an  army  ;  but  the 
Peirinthians  refused  to  give  him  any.  He  therefore  begged 
them  at  any  rate  to  grant  him  some  men  from  among  their 
citizens  to  act  as  a  garrison  for  certain  strongholds,  in  order 
that  he  might  make  full  use  of  the  soldiers  who  were  at 
present  on  duty  there.  To  this  request  they  promptly 
acceded,  thinking  that  they  would  thus  obtain  possession  of 
30  these  strongholds.  But  Cotys  threw  into  prison  those  who 
were  sent  and  ordered  the  Peirinthians  to  recover  them  by 
sending  him  the  money  which  he  wished  to  borrow  from 
them. 

Mentor,  the  Rhodian,  having  arrested  Hermeias  and 
seized  his  estates,  allowed  the  overseers  whom  Hermeias 
35  had  appointed  to  retain  their  positions.      But  when  they  all 
1  Omitting  ocai  m  avrov  in  1.  4  with  T  and  Schneider. 

BOOK  II.  2  1351" 

felt  secure  and  took  steps  to  recover  anything  which  had 
been  hidden  or  deposited  for  safety  elsewhere,  he  arrested 
them  and  deprived  them  of  all  they  had. 

Memnon,  the  Rhodian,  after  making  himself  master  i35ib 
of  Lampsacus,  was  in  need  of  money.    He  therefore  exacted 
a  heavy  tribute  from  the  richest  citizens,  telling  them  that 
they  could  collect  it  from  the  rest  of  the  citizens.    But  when 
the  latter  had  contributed,  he  ordered  .them  to  lend  him  5 
this  sum  as  well,  fixing  a  period  l  within  which  he  would 
pay  them  back. 

On  another  occasion  when  he  was  in  need  of  money,  he 
demanded  contributions  from  them,  saying  that  they  should 
be  repaid  out  of  the  revenues.  They  therefore  contributed, 
thinking  that  they  would  soon  receive  their  money  back. 
But  when  the  time  was  at  hand  for  the  payment  of  the 
revenues,  he  told  them  that  he  needed  these  revenues  as  10 
well,  but  would  repay  them  later  with  interest. 

He  also  excused  himself  from  paying  the  rations  and 
wages  of  those  who  were  serving  under  him  for  six  days  in 
the  year,2  declaring  that  on  these  days  they  had  no  watch  to 
keep,  no  marching  and  no  expenses,  meaning  the  '  omitted ' 
days.:i  As  he  was  already -giving  the  soldiers  their  rations  15 
on  the  second  day  of  the  new  month,  he  thus  passed  over 
three  days  in  the  first  month  and  five  by  the  following 
month,  and  so  he  gradually  gained  on  them  till  he  reached 
a  total  of  thirty  days.4 

Charidemus    of  Orus,   who   held    certain    places    in 
Aeolia,  when  Artabazus  was  marching  against  him  needed  20 
money  to  pay  his  soldiers.    At  first,  then,  the  citizens  gave 

'   Reading  with  Kirchhoff  x/joi/oi/  for  eV  xp6v<$  in  1.  5. 
-  Reading  with  Richards  rov  evinvrov  in  1.  12. 

3  Memnon's  argument  seems  to  have  been  that  of  the  twelve  months 
in  the  year  six  were  'hollow'  months,  i.e.  had  only  twenty-nine  days, 
and  that  since  thirty  was  the  proper  number  of  days  in  a  month,  he 
would  be  paying  them  for  six  days  too  much,  if  he  gave  them  the  same 
amount  for  a  '  hollow '  as  for  a  '  full '  month. 

4  The  year  consisting  of  twelve  months  of  twenty-nine  and  thirty 
days  alternately,  in  the  first  month  he  docked  them  of  three  days'  pay 
(one  day  on  the  ground  that  it  was  a  '  hollow '  month,  and  two  days  by 
paying  them  in  advance  on  the  second  day  for  the  rest  of  the  month)  ; 
in  the  second  month,  which  was  not  a  'hollow'  month,  he  deprived 
them  of  two  days'  pay  by  paying  them  in  advance  on  the  second  day. 
They  thus  lost  five  days  in  each  period  of  two  months,  i.  e.  a  total  of 
thirty  clays  in  the  year. 

i35ib  OECONOMICA 

him  contributions,  but  afterwards  they  declared  that  they 
had  nothing  left  to  give.  Charidemus  then  ordered  the 
inhabitants  of  the  place  which  he  thought  was  richest  to  send 
away  to  another  place  any  coin  or  other  valuable  treasure 
which  they  possessed,  and  he  promised  to  give  them  an 

35  escort ;  at  the  same  time  it  was  clear  that  he  himself  was 
also  removing  his  valuables.  When  they  had  obeyed  him, 
he  led  them  a  little  way  outside  the  city  and,  after  ex 
amining  what  they  had,  took  all  that  he  needed  and  sent 
them  back  again.  He  also  made  a  proclamation  in  the 
cities  over  which  he  ruled  that  no  one  was  to  keep  any 

30  arms  in  his  house,  the  penalty  for  so  doing  being  a  fine 
which  he  specified.  He  then  took  no  further  action  and 
paid  no  attention  to  the  matter.  The  citizens,  thinking  that 
he  had  not  meant  the  proclamation  to  be  taken  seriously, 
continued  to  keep  the  arms  which  they  happened  to 
possess.  But  Charidemus  suddenly  instituted  a  house  to 
house  search  and  exacted  the  fine  from  those  in  whose 

35  houses  he  found  any  arms. 

A  certain  Philoxenus,  a  Macedonian  who  was  satrap 
of  Caria,  being  in  need  of  money,  said  that  he  intended  to 
celebrate  the  Dionysia,  and  he  nominated  the  richest  of 
I352a  the  Carians  to  defray  the  cost  of  the  choruses  and  gave 
directions  as  to  what  they  had  to  supply.  But  seeing  that 
they  were  annoyed,  he  sent  to  them  secretly  and  asked 
them  what  they  were  willing  to  give  to  be  released  from 
serving.  They  declared  their  readiness  to  give  considerably 
5  more  than  they  thought  it  would  cost  them,  in  order  to  be 
freed  from  the  trouble  and  the  neglect  of  their  private 
affairs  which  it  would  entail.  Philoxenus  accepted  what 
they  offered  and  put  others  on  the  list,  until  he  received 
from  them  what  he  wanted  and  what  each  could  spare. 

Evaeses,  the    Syrian,   being   satrap   of  Egypt,  dis 
covering  that  the  provincial  governors  were  on  the  point  of 

10  revolting  from  him,  summoned  them  to  the  palace  and 
hanged  them  all,  and  ordered  that  their  relatives  should  be 
told  that  they  were  in  prison.  Their  relatives  therefore 
severally  began  to  negotiate  on  their  behalf  and  tried  to 
buy  the  release  of  the  captives.  Evaeses  made  an  agree- 

BOOK  II.  2  1352* 

ment  in  each  case  and,  after  receiving  the  sums  for  which  15 
he  had  stipulated,  restored  them  to  their  relatives — dead. 

Cleomenes,  an  Alexandrian  who  was  satrap  of  Egypt, 
when  there  was  a  severe  famine  everywhere  else  while 
Egypt  was  less  seriously  affected,  forbade  the  export  of 
corn,  and  when  the  provincial  governors  declared  that 
they  would  not  be  able  to  pay  the  tribute  because  corn 
could  not  be  exported,  he  cancelled  the  prohibition,  but  20 
put  a  heavy  tax  on  the  corn.  The  result  was  that,  if  he 
did  not  succeed  in  getting  a  large  tax  at  the  cost  of  a  small 
exportation,  at  least l  the  provincial  governors  lost  their 
excuse. 

As  he  was  sailing  through  the  district  in  which  the 
crocodile  is  regarded  as  a  deity,  one  of  his  slaves  was 
carried  off.  He  therefore  summoned  the  priests  and  told  25 
them  that  since  he  had  been  injured  without  provocation  he 
intended  to  take  vengeance 2  on  the  crocodiles,  and  gave 
orders  to  hunt  them.  The  priests,  in  order  that  their  god 
might  not  be  affronted,  collected  all  the  gold  that  they 
possessed  and  presented  it  to  him,  with  the  result  that  he 
desisted. 

When  king  Alexander  commanded  him  to  found  a  city 
near  the  Pharos  and  to  establish  there  the  mart  which  was  3° 
formerly  held  at  Canopus,  he  sailed  to  Canopus  and  told 
the  priests  and  the  owners  of  property  there  that  he  had 
come  to  transfer  them.    The  priests  and  inhabitants  collected 
and  gave  him  a  sum  of  money  to  induce  him  to  leave  their 
mart  undisturbed.     This  he  accepted  and  for  the  moment  35 
left  them  alone,  but  afterwards,  when  he  had  the  material 
for  building  ready,  he  sailed  to   Canopus  and  demanded 
an    excessive    amount    of    money    from    them,  which    he  I3521' 
said    represented    the   difference  to    him    between    having 
the  mart  near  the  Pharos  and  at  Canopus.    And  when  they 
said  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  give  him  the  money  he 
made  them  move  their  city. 

And  when  he  had  sent  some  one  to  make  a  purchase  and 
discovered   that  his   messenger  had   got  what  he  wanted 

1  Reading  ye  for  re  (W.  D.  Ross)  in  1.  22. 

2  Reading  with  Keil  upvvf'urQai.  for  <I/xiWa$<u  in  1.  25. 

I352'1  OECONOMICA 

5  cheaply  but  intended  to  charge  him  an  excessive  price,  he 
told  the  friends  of  the  purchaser  that  he  had  heard  that  he 
had  made  his  purchases  at  an  excessive  price  and  therefore 
he  should  not  pay  any  attention  to  him  ;  at  the  same  time 
with  assumed  wrath  he  railed  against  his  stupidity.  When 

10  they  heard  this  they  told  Cleomenes  that  he  ought  not  to 
believe  those  who  spoke  against  the  messenger  until  he 
came  himself  and  rendered  his  account.  When  the  pur 
chaser  arrived  they  told  him  what  Cleomenes  had  said; 
and  he,  wishing  to  make  a  good  impression  on  them  and  on 
Cleomenes,  submitted  the  prices  at  which  he  had  actually 
bought  the  goods. 

When  corn  was  being  sold  in  the  country  at  ten  drachmae, 

i. she  summoned  the  dealers  and  asked  them  at  what  price 
they  would  do  business  with  him.  They  named  a  lower 
price  than  that  at  which  they  were  selling  to  the  merchants. 
However,  he  ordered  them  x  to  hand  over  their  corn  at  the 
same  price  as  they  were  selling  to  every  one  else  ;  and  fixing 
the  price  of  corn  at  thirty-two  drachmae  he  then  sold  it 
himself. 

20  He  also  called  the  priests  together  and  told  them  that 
the  expenditure 2  on  the  temples  in  the  country  was 
excessive ;  consequently  some  of  the  temples  and  the 
majority  of  the  priests  must  be  abolished.  The  priests 
individually  and  collectively  gave  him  the  sacred  treasures, 
thinking  that  he  really  intended  to  carry  out  his  threat  and 
because  each  wished  that  his  own  temple  should  be  un- 

35  disturbed  and  himself  continue  to  be  priest. 

Antimenes,  the  Rhodian,  being  put  by  Alexander  in 
charge  of  the  roads  3  round  Babylon,  raised  money  in  the 
following  way.  An  ancient  law  existed  in  Babylonia  that 
anything  which  was  brought  into  the  country  should  pay 
a  duty  of  ten  per  cent.,  but  no  one  ever  enforced  it. 
Antimenes,  waiting  till  all  the  satraps  and  armies  were 

30  expected  and  no  small  number  of  ambassadors  and  crafts- 

1  Reading'with  Bekker  eVeiVots  in  1.  17. 

2  Omitting  ai/co/xnXoi;  with  some  MSS.  in  1.  20. 

15  j7/j«>£io?  in  I.  26  is  corrupt,  but  the  right  sense  is  given  by  the  Latin 
version,  which  reads  ctiratione  ei  data  uiaruni. 

BOOK  II.  2  1352'- 

men  summoned  from  abroad,  bringing  others  with  them,1 
and  persons  travelling  on  their  own  private  affairs,  and 
many  gifts  were  being  brought  in,  exacted  the  ten  per  cent, 
duty  according  to  the  existing  law. 

On  another  occasion,  when  providing  the  slaves  who  were 
to  serve  in  the  army,  he  commanded  that  any  owner  who 
wished  should  register  the  value  which  he  put  upon  them,  35 
and  they  were  to  pay  eight  drachmae  a  year  ;  if  the  slave 
ran  away  the  owner  was  to  receive  the  price  which  he  had 
registered.2     Many  slaves  being  registered,  he  amassed  a  i353a 
considerable  sum  of  money.     And  whenever  any  slave  ran 
away  he  ordered  the  satrap  of  the  country 3  in  which  the 
camp  was  situated  to  recover  the  runaway  or  else  to  pay 
the  price  to  the  owner. 

Ophelas,  the  Olynthian,  having  appointed  a  super-  5 
intendent  over  the  province  of  Athribis,  when  the  provincial 
governors  of  that  district  came  to  him  and  expressed  their 
willingness  to  pay  of  their  own  accord  a  much  larger  sum 
and  begged  him  to  dismiss  the  superintendent  whom  he 
had  just  appointed,  asked  them  if  they  would  be  able  to 
pay  what  they  promised ;  when  they  answered  in  the  10 
affirmative  he  left  the  superintendent  at  his  post  and  bade 
him  exact  the  amount  of  tribute  which  they  themselves 
had  assessed.  Thus  he  did  not  think  it  right  either  to 
degrade  the  official  whom  he  had  appointed  or  to  impose 
a  heavier  tribute  upon  them  than  they  themselves  had  fixed, 
but  at  the  same  time  he  himself  received  a  far  larger 
amount  of  money. 

Pythocles,  the  Athenian,  recommended  to  the  Athe-  15 
nians  that  the  state  should  take  the  lead  from  the  mines  at 
Laurium  out  of  private  hands  at  the  market  price  of  two 
drachmae  and   that  they  should   then  themselves  fix  the 
price  at  six  drachmae  and  so  sell  it. 

Chabrias,  when  crews  had  been  enrolled  for  a  hundred 
and  twenty  ships  and  Taus  only  needed  sixty,  ordered  the  20 
crews  of  the  sixty  ships  which  remained  behind  to  supply 

1  Omitting  in  1.  31  TOVS  before  ayovras  (Aldine),  but  the  whole  phrase 
("AXouf  TOVS  ayovras  is  probably  corrupt. 

2  An  early  example  of  insuring  employees. 
:(  Reading  with  Schneider  rf/s-  (yvj)  in  1.  3. 

i353a  OECONOMICA 

those  who  sailed  with  two  months'  provisions,  or  else  to  sail 
themselves.  They,  wishing  to  attend  to  their  own  affairs, 
complied  with  his  demand. 

Antimenes  ordered  the  satraps  to  keep  the  storehouses 

25  rilled  along  the  royal  roads  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country  ;  but  whenever  an  army  or  any  other  body  of  men 
unaccompanied  by  the  king  passed  along,  he  used  to  send 
one  of  his  own  men  and  sell  the  contents  of  the  storehouses. 
I353b  Cleomcnes,   when  the  first  day  of  the  month   was 

approaching  and  he  had  to  give  his  soldiers  their  rations, 
purposely  put  back  into  harbour,  and  when  the  new  month 
was  approaching  he  put  out  again  and  distributed  the 
rations ;  he  then  left  an  interval  from  the  beginning  of  the 

5  month  until  the  first  day  of  the  next  month.  The  soldiers, 
therefore,  because  they  had  recently  received  their  rations, 
kept  quiet ;  and  Cleomenes  by  passing  over  a  month 
deprived  them  of  a  month's  pay  in  each  year. 

Stabelbius,  general  of  the  Mysians,  when  he  owed 
his   soldiers   pay,   called    the   officers1   together   and    told 

10  them  that  he  had  no  need  of  private  soldiers  but  only  of 
officers,  and  that,  when  he  did  need  soldiers,  he  gave  each 
officer  a  sum  of  money  and  sent  him  out  to  collect 
mercenaries,  and  that  he  would  rather  give  the  officers  the 
pay  which  ought  to  go  to  the  soldiers.  He  therefore 
ordered  them  each  to  send  away  their  own  levies  out  of 
the  country.  The  officers,  thinking  that  it  would  be  an 

15  opportunity  to  make  money,  dismissed  the  soldiers  in 
accordance  with  his  commands.  But  after  a  short  interval 
he  collected  the  officers  together  and  told  them  that  just  as 
a  flute  player  was  no  use  without  a  chorus,  so  too  officers 
were  useless  wilhout  private  soldiers  ;  he  therefore  ordered 
them  to  leave  the  country. 

20  Dionysius,  when    he  was    making   a    round    of  the 

temples,  whenever  he  saw  a  gold  or  silver  table  displayed, 
ordered  that  a  libation  should  be  poured  out  'to  good  luck  ' 
and  that  the  table  should  be  carried  off;  and  whenever  he 
saw  amongst  the  statues  one  which  held  out  a  wine  cup,  he 

1   Reading  in  1.  8  o  Mv<r£>v  arpaTrjyus  (Scaliger)  ofaiXuv  (Schneider) 
(jTpnnuiTdif  fjLtcrfl<>i>,  (TvyKa\t(rns  TOVS  fjyt/jioi'ns  (Camerarius)  t<f>T)(r(i'. 

BOOK  II.  2  1353* 

would  say,  '  I  accept  your  pledge ',  and  order  the  statue  to 
be  carried  away.    And  he  used  to  strip  the  raiment  of  gold  1 
and  crowns  of  silver2  from   the   statues,  saying   that  he  25 
would  give3  them  others  lighter  and  more  fragrant  ;  he  then 
clad  them  with  white  garments  and  crowns  of  white  violets. 

1  Omitting  re  between  rd  and  xpuo-5  in  1.  24. 

2  Reading  rovs  crrdpdvovs  (rovs  apyvpovs}  (coni.  Susemihl)  in  1.  24. 

3  Reading  fucoSeVrtp'  &v  ftovvm  (Richards)  in  1.  26. 

INDEX 

43a-53b  - 
Abydos,  49a3. 
Acropolis,  47a  15. 
Agriculture,  prior  among  the  arts, 

43a  25  ;  defined,  43"  28  ;  a  natural 

art,  43a  30 ;  conducive  to  bravery, 

43b2ff. 

Alexander,  52*28,  b26. 
Alexandrian,  52*  16. 
Aliens,  resident,  at  Abydos,  49*4; 

at    Byzantium,  47a  i  ;    at    Chal- 

cedon,  47b  22. 
Amisus,  5ob2y,  28. 
Antimenes,  imposes  10  %  duty  on 

imports    in    Babylonia,    52b26; 

institutes     insurance     of    slaves 

serving  in  the  army,  52b33  ff.  ; 

sells  the  contents  of  storehouses 

on  the  royal  roads,  53a24ff. 
Antissa,  47*  25. 
Aristotle,the  Rhodian,  raises  money 

from  the  rival  parties  at  Phocaea, 

48a  35  ff. ;  obtains  control  of  the 

law-courts,  48bu. 
Artabazus,  5ib2o. 
Artabe,  5ia9- 
Arts,  the,  their  subdivisions,  43*5  ; 

the   mercenary   a's,   43*29;    the 

warlike  a's,  43*  30  ;   the  illiberal 

a's,  43b3.     See  also  Agricitlture, 

Mining. 
Athena,  47*  15. 
Athenian,  47*4,  8,  18,  50*23,  b33, 

5iai8,  53aiS. 
Athribis,  province  of,  53a6. 
Attic  system   of  economy,  44b3i, 

45ai8. 

Babylon,  52b  27. 

Banks,  right  to  change  money 
granted  to  a  single  b.  at  Byzan 
tium,  46'' 24. 

Black  Sea,  ships  from,  forced  to  put 
in  at  Byzantium,  46b3i  ;  seized 
by  Chalcedonians,  47b25- 

Bosporus,  tyrants  on  the,  47b3- 

Byzantines,  raise  money  by  selling 
sacred  enclosures  and  other  pro 
perty  and  rights,  46b  13  ff. ;  grant 
right  of  changing  money  to  a 
single  bank,  46b24;  grant  citi 
zenship  to  those  born  of  one 

I343a-I353b 

citizen-parent  only,  46b  27  ;  force 
ships  from  Black  Sea  to  put  in, 
46b3i;  allow  resident-aliens  to 
lend  money  on  mortgages,  47*  i 

Callistratus,  doubles  the  sum  for 
which  harbour-dues  in  Macedonia 
are  sold,  5oa  i6ff. 

Canopus,  52*  30,  31. 

Caria,  48a4,  5ib36. 

Carians,  52*  i. 

Carthaginians,  not  allowed  to  drink 
wine  during  military  service, 
44a33- 

Chabrias,  his  advice  to  Taus,  king 
of  Egypt,  5ob  33  ;  his  device  for 
obtaining  provisions  for  the  fleet, 

Chalcedonians,  pay  their  mer 
cenaries  by  seizing  passing  ships 
from  the  Black  Sea,  47b  20  ff. 

Charidemus,  obtains  money  by 
deceiving  the  Aeolians,  5ib  19  ff.  ; 
forbids  the  possession  of  arms, 

Chians,  raise  money  by  forcing 
debtors  to  pay  the  state  and  pay 
ing  interest  to  creditors,  47b35- 

C/tvus,  47*35. 

Chorus,  tragic,  47aii,  5ib37- 

Citizenship,  granted  at  Byzantium 
to  those  born  of  one  citizen- 
parent  only,  46b  27. 

City,  the,  the  subject-matter  of 
Politics,  43a2,  7;  definition  of, 
43alo;  economy  of  (Political 
economy),  45b  14,  46b  5  ff. 

Clans,  property  owned  by,  46b  15. 

Clazomenians,  raise  money  by 
commandeering  oil  and  selling  it 
abroad,  48bi7ff.  ;  establish  an 
iron  coinage,  48b  24  ff. 

Cleomenes,  places  a  tax  on  exported 
corn,  52ai6ff.  ;  obtains  money 
by  threatening  to  hunt  sacred 
crocodiles  in  Egypt,  52a23ff.  ; 
transfers  the  mart  at  Canopus  to 
the  Pharos,  52a29;  his  device 
for  obtaining  goods  at  a  fair  price, 
52b4ff.  ;  fixes  the  price  of  corn, 

INDEX 

52b  14  ;  obtains  money  by  threat 
ening  to  reduce  the  number  of 
temples  in  Egypt,  52b2off. ;  by 
a  trick  deprives  his  soldiers  of  a 
month's  pay  in  the  year,  53''  I  ff. 

Coinage,  45b  22,  23;  Hippias  de 
clares  the  Athenian  c.  debased 
and  calls  it  in,  then  reissues  it, 
47a8;  of  iron  at  Clazomene, 
4Sb  25 ;  of  tin  at  Syracuse, 
49a  32  ff. ;  debased  at  Syracuse, 
49b3off. ;  of  bronze  issued  for 
silver  by  Timotheus,  5oa  23  ff. 

Condalus.  raises  money  by  various 
devices,  4Sai8ff. 

Corcyra,  5oa  30. 

Corinthian,  46a32,  33,  ''5. 

Cotys,  brings  down  the  price  of 
corn  by  employing  troops  for 
agriculture,  5ial8ff. ;  obtains 
money  by  a  trick  from  the  Peirin- 
thians,  5iu24ff. 

Crocodiles,  sacred,  in  Egypt,  52*24. 

Cypselus,  his  deception  of  the 
Corinthians,  46a  32  ff. 

Cyzicus,  popular  party  at,  pays  the 
army  by  releasing  wealthy  citizens 
from  prison  on  payment  of  a  fine, 
47b3iff. 

Demeter,  49al5- 

Didales,  deceives  his  soldiers  by 
showing  them  mule-loads  of  silver 
plate,  5oai6ff. ;  keeps  artificers 
and  retailers  in  his  personal 
service,  50'' 30. 

Dion,  44b35- 

Dionysia,  5ib37- 

Dionysius,  of  Syracuse,  appropriates 
by  a  trick  the  jewellery  of  the 
Syracusans,  49ai4ff. ;  obtains 
money  for  the  fleet  by  a  trick, 
49*25fT. ;  issues  a  tin  coinage, 
49a  32  ff. ;  obtains  money  by  the 
trick  of  selling  his  own  household 
goods,  49a36ff. ;  obtains  money 
by  removing  the  tax  on  cattle  and 
then  reimposing  it,  49b6  ;  appro 
priates  the  income  of  orphan 
minors,  49bl4ff. ;  discovers  by 
a  trick  the  hidden  treasures  of 
the  Rhegians,  49b  17  ff. ;  debases 
the  coinage,  49b3off. ;  obtains 
by  a  trick  the  treasures  taken  by 
his  sailors  from  the  temple  of 
Leucothea,  49''  33  ;  appropriates 

offerings     and      decorations     of 
statues,  53b2off. 
Druggists,  46b22. 

Economics,  compared  with  Politics, 
43a  I  ;  its  sphere  is  a  monarchy, 
43a4;  its  subject-matter  is  the 
household,  43*  2,  9 ;  prior  in 
origin  to  Politics,  43*  15  ;  includes 
rules  for  the  association  of  hus 
band  and  wife,  43a  23. 

Economist,  qualities  of  the,  44b  22  ff, 

45b7ff- 

Economy,  systems  of,  Attic,  44b3l, 
45ai8;  Laconian,  44b3i,  45b2; 
Persian,  44b3o,  34;  four  kinds 
of,  Royal,  Satrapic,  Political,  and 
Personal,  45b  1 1  ff. 

Egypt,  52a9,  1 6,  17. 

Egyptian,  5ob33. 

Enclosures,  sacred,  46bl3;  be 
longing  to  associations  and  clans, 
46bi5. 

Ephesians,  the,  forbid  the  wearing 
of  gold  ornaments,  49a  9. 

'Essence'  defined,  43ai3- 

Evaeses,  obtains  money  by  a  trick 
from  the  relatives  of  governors 
whom  he  had  hanged,  52a9ff 

Expenditure,  must  not  exceed 
income,  46*  16. 

Export,  exports,  45b  21,  24  ;  of  corn 
forbidden  at  Selybria,  48b33  ;  this 
prohibition  relaxed,  49a  I  ;  tax 
on  corn  exported  from  Egypt, 
52*20. 

Farmers,  loans  to,  49a5- 

Female,    see    Male    and  female, 

Husband  and  wife. 
Fisheries,  46b  20. 
Food,  of  slaves,  44a  31  ff. 
Freedom,  as  a  reward  of  merit  in 

slaves,  44b  15. 

Harbour  dues,  in  Macedonia,  5oai6. 

Heraclea,  the  people  of,  pay  their 
army  by  commandeering  local 
supplies  and  selling  them  to  the 
soldiers,  47b  3  ff. 

Hermeias,  5ia33,  35. 

llesiod,  (Works  and  Days,  405) 
43a20,  (do.,  699)  44*  16. 

Hippias,  exacts  payment  for  build- 
ings,&c., projecting  into  thestreets 
of  Athens,  47a4;  declares  coinage 
debased  and  calls  it  in,  then 
reissues  it,  47*  8 ;  excuses  from 

INDEX 

state  services  on  payment  of 
it  fine,  47aii;  imposes  a  pay 
ment  in  grain  and  money  for 
persons  born  and  dying,  47*  14. 

Household,  the,  is  the  subject- 
matter  of  Economics,  43a2,  9  ; 
its  component  parts,  43ai8;  the 
first  condition  of  subsistence, 
43*22;  disposition  of,  45a  24  ff. 

Husband  and  wife,  rules  for  their 
association  a  part  of  Economics, 
43a  23  ;  the  common  life  natural, 
43b8ff,  26;  the  nature  of  their 
intercourse,  43b  17  ff. ;  their  func 
tions  compared,  43b  27  ff. 

Imports,  45b2i,  24  ;  10%  duty  on, 
in  Babylonia,  52b27. 

Income,  sources  of,  should  be  dis 
tributed,  44''  27  ;  must  not  be 
exceeded  by  expenditure,  46ai6. 
See  also  Revenue. 

Insurance  of  slaves  serving  in  the 
army,  52b33ff. 

Intercourse,  sexual,  see  Sexual  in- 
tercourse. 

Iphicrates,  his  advice  to  Cotys, 
5iai8. 

Iron  coinage  at  Clazomenae,  48b  25. 

Jugglers,  44b2i. 

Lacedaemonians  fast  for  a  day  and 

give  the  money  thus  saved  to  the 

Samians,  47b  16. 
Laconian  system  of  economy,  44b 

3i,  45b2. 
Lampsacus,  5ibi,  provisions  at  L. 

bought  up  by  the  state  and  sold 

at  a  profit,  47b  32. 
Laurium,  53a  16. 
Lead-mines  at  Laurium,  53a  16. 
Leucothea,  49''  34. 
Levy  on  property  at  Potidaea,  47* 

1 8. 

Libyan,  45a2,4. 
Loans,  to  farmers,  49a5. 
Lycians,  the,  wear  their  hair  long, 

48a28;    deceived   by    Condalus, 

48a  30. 
Lygdamis,    his    trick    for    raising 

money,  46''  7  ff. 

Macedonia,  5Oa  16. 
Macedonian,  5lb36. 
Male  and  female,  necessary  to  one 
another,    43b  1 1  ff. ;    their    inter 

course  among  the  animals  and 
among  men  compared,  43a  13  ff. ; 
see  also  Husband  and  wife. 

Man,  a  component  part  of  the 
household,  43al8  ;  the  worthiest 
subject  of  Economics,  44a  23. 

Man  and  woman,  see  Husband  and 
wife,  Male  and  female. 

Marriage,  of  slaves,  commended, 
44b  17  ;  see  also  Husband  and 
wife. 

Master,  the,  necessity  for  personal 
supervision  by,  44b  34  ;  should 
rise  early  and  retire  late,  45a  13. 

Mausolus,  48*18,31;  the  trick  by 
which  he  paid  tribute  due  to  the 
king  of  1'ersia,  48*4;  raises 
money  by  a  trick  from  the  Mylas- 
sians,  48a  u. 

Medimnus,  47*33,  5ob9,  5ia2l. 

Memnon,  obtains  money  by  a  trick 
from  the  inhabitants  of  Lam 
psacus,  51''  i  ff.  ;  by  a  trick  avoids 
paying  his  soldiers  for  30  days  in 
the  year,  5lbu  ff. 

Mendaeans,  only  exact  property-tax 
when  required,  5oa  6  ;  sell  slaves 
to  pay  war  expenses,  5oa  n. 

Mentor,  obtains  the  possessions  of 
Hermeias  by  a  trick,  5ia33ff. 

Mercenaries,  47b2o,  53b  n. 

Mctreta,  5obio. 

Mines,  at  Laurium,  53a  16. 

Mining,  the  art  of,  43a26. 

Monarchy,  the  sphere  of  Economics 
is  a  m.,  43a  4. 

Money-changing,  the  right  of,  46b 
24. 

Mortgaged  property,  loans  on,  47a  I . 

Mylassians,  48a  n,  14. 

Mysians,  53bS. 

Naxian,  46b  7. 

Oil,  commandeered  by  the  state  at 

Clazomenae    and    sold    abroad, 

48bi7. 

Olynthian,  50*  12,23,  53a5- 
Ophelas,  his  device   for  obtaining 

more  money  from  the  provincial 

governors,  53*5  ff. 
Orus,  5ib  19. 

Peirinthians,  5Ia24,  25. 
Persia,  the  king  of,  48*4,  13,   30, 
51*6. 

INDEX 

Persian,  45*  2,  50''  16  ;  P.  system  of 

economy,  44b  30,  34. 
Personal     Economy,    45^  14;     its 

scope,  46*8-16. 

Pharos,  the  (at  Alexandria),  52a  30. 
Philoxenus,     obtains     money     by 

granting  relief  from  state-services, 

5ib36ff. 
Phocaea,  rival  parties  at,  deceived 

by  Aristotle  the  Rhodian,48a  35  fif. 
Political     Economy,     45b  14 ;      its 

scope,  46b  5  fif. 
Politics,  compared  with  Economics, 

43a  i  ;    its  subject-matter   is  the 

city,    43*2,  7;    Economics   prior 

to  P.,  43*15. 
Poll-tax,  46*4,  48a32. 
Potidaea,   the    Athenians   at,   levy 

a  tax  on  property,  47a  18. 
Procreation,    the    sole    object    of 

sexual  intercourse  of  animals,  43b 

1 5  ;  in  man  subserves  nature  and 

provides     for     the     support     of 

parents    in    old    age,   43b  20  ff. ; 

provides  for  the  perpetuation  of 

the  species,  43b25- 
Property,  a  component  part  of  the 

household,  43ai8;    levy   on,   at   ' 

Potidaea,     47a  18  ;     tax    on,    at  I 

Mende,  50*  1 1. 
Punishment  of  slaves,  44a  35. 
Pythagoreans,  44*  10. 
Pythocles,  advises  the  Athenians  to 

fix  the  market-price  of  lead,  53" 

iSff. 

Revenue,  various  kinds  of,  45b 
29  ff.;  sources  of,  46*  2  iff.;  see 
also  Income. 

Rhegians,  49b22. 

Rhegium,  49b  17. 

Rhodian,  5ia33,  bi,  $2b26. 

Roads,  royal,  48"  24,  52b  26,  53a  24. 

'  Royal'  Economy,45bis  ;  its  scope, 
45bi9ff. 

Salt,  right  to  sell,  46b2i. 

Samians,  47b  16,  19. 

Samos,  5ob4. 

Satrap,   45b25,    5ib36,    52*9,    16, 

b29,  53a3- 
'Satrapic*    Economy,    45bI3,    28; 

its  scope,  45b29  ff. 
Selybrians,  raise  money  by  relaxing 

prohibition  on  the  export  of  corn, 

48b33ff. 

Sexual  intercourse,  in  animals  based 
on  instinct,  43*'  13;  rules  for,  in 
man,  44*  13. 

Slaves,  necessity  for  good  s.,  44" 
25 ;  their  education  and  treat 
ment,  44a26ff. ;  punishment  of, 
44a  35  >  f°°d  °f>  44a  3IrF' ',  freedom 
to  be  offered  as  prize  of  merit, 
44b  1 5  ;  best  type  of,  44b  1 1  ff. ; 
marriage  among,  44b  17  ;  leisure 
and  amusements  of,  44b  19  ;  sold 
at  Mende  to  pay  expenses  of  war, 
50*  1 1  ;  insurance  of  slaves  serv 
ing  in  the  army,  52''  33  ff. 

Soothsayers,  46'' 22. 

Sosipolis  raises  money  by  selling 
offerings  to  Dionysus,  47a25ff. 

Stabelbius,  by  a  trick  disbands  his 
soldiers  to  whom  he  owes  pay, 

53b8ff- 
State-services,     Hippias     excuses 

from,  on  payment  of  fine,  47a  1 1  ; 

similar    device   used  by    Philo- 

menus,  5lb36ff. 
Storehouses    on  royal'  roads,    53a 

24. 

Suppliants,  reverence  for,  44a  [  I. 
Syracusans,  49b4- 
Syracuse,  49*  14. 
Syrian,  52*  9. 

Taos,  king  of  Egypt,  53a2o,  ob 
tains  money  from  the  priests  by 
threatening  that  they  will  be  dis 
pensed  with,  and  borrows  other 
money  from  them,  5ob  33  ff. ;  taxes 
corn,  5ia8;  taxes  industry,  51* 
10 ;  commandeers  un  minted  gold 
and  silver,  51*  13. 

Taxes,  various  kinds  of,  45b  30  ff. ; 
on  cattle  at  Syracuse,  49b6;  on 
property  at  Mende,  50*  1 1  ;  on 
corn  and  industries  in  Egypt,  5Ia 
8  ff.  See  also  Poll-tax. 

Thracian,  51"  24. 

Timotheus,  issues  bronze  for  silver 
coinage,  5oa  23  ff . ;  by  a  trick 
avoids  paying  his  soldiers,  50* 
30  ff. ;  sells  their  own  produce  to 
the  besieged  Samians,  50''  4; 
allows  provisions  to  be  sold 
wholesale  only,  50'*  7. 

Tithe,  45''  33. 

Trading,  retail,  43*29. 

Tribute,  paid  by  Mausolus  to  the 
king  of  Persia,  48a  4. 

INDEX 

Tyrants,  on   the   Bosporus,  47^  4 ; 

Matisolus  t.  of  Caria,  48*  5. 
Tyrrhenia,  49''  33. 

Wealth,  acquisition  and  preserva 
tion  of,  44b  23  ff. 

Wife,  the,  in  the  household,  43a  21, 
b7,  45a6;  the  proper  possession 
of  all  freemen,  43"  22  ;  laws  to  be 

observed    towards,    44a  8.      See 

also  Husband  and  wife. 
Wine,  not  to  be  given  to  slaves, 

44a3iff.  ;      not    drunk  'by    the 

Carthaginians  on  military  service, 

44a  33- 
Woman,    see    Male    and  female, 

Husband  and  wife,  Wife. 

Zeus,  46*32. 

ATHENIENSIUM 
RESPUBLICA 

BY 

SIR  FREDERIC  G.  KENYON 

K.C.B.,  F.B.A. 

HON.    FELLOW  OF   MAGDALEN   AND   NEW   COLLEGES 

OXFORD 

AT  THE   CLARENDON    PRESS 
1920 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY    PRESS 

LONDON  EDINBURGH  GLASGOW  NEW   YORK 

TORONTO        MELBOURNE       CAPE   TOWN        BOMBAY 

HUMPHREY  MILFORD 

PUBLISHER   TO   THE    UNIVERSITY 

PREFACE 

THIS  translation  of  the  treatise  on  the  Constitution  of 
Athens  is  a  revision  of  a  translation  prepared  by  me,  shortly 
after  the  first  appearance  of  the  Greek  text  in  1891,  for 
Messrs.  Bell  &  Son.  and  is  issued  with  their  concurrence. 
It  has  been  revised  throughout,  with  a  view  both  to  improv 
ing  it  in  detail  and  to  bringing  it  into  conformity  with  the 
text  as  now  established.  In  particular,  the  last  six  chapters, 
which  have  been  reconstructed  out  of  a  large  number  of 
fragments  and  were  first  printed  as  a  continuous  text  in 
the  edition  prepared  by  me  for  the  Berlin  Academy  (1903), 
are  now  translated  for  the  first  time. 

The  text  taken  as  the  basis  is  that  printed  in  the  Oxford 
series  (Scriptornm  Classicoriim  Bibliotheca  Oxoniensis),  which 
will  be  published  almost  simultaneously.  It  is  almost  iden 
tical  with  that  of  the  Berlin  edition ;  indeed  the  extent  of 
variation  between  this  and  all  recent  editions— Thalheim 
(1909),  Sandys  (1912),  Hudc  (1916)— is  very  slight  and  in 
default  of  the  appearance  of  another  manuscript  of  the 
treatise,  to  set  beside  the  British  Museum  papyrus,  the 
text  may  be  considered  as  definitely  established  within  very 
narrow  limits. 

In  translating  it,  I  have  endeavoured  to  follow  the  matter- 
of-fact,  unadorned  style  of  the  original.  In  the  notes  I  have 
confined  myself  to  the  indication  of  possible  variations  of 
text  and  the  explanation  of  passages  which  appear  obscure. 
I  have  not  undertaken  any  examination  of  the  credibility 
of  the  statements  made,  or  of  the  historical  value  of  the 
treatise. 

I  have  to  thank  Mr.  W.  D.  Ross  and  Prof.  J.  A.  Smith 
for  suggestions  on  points  of  detail. 

F.  G.  K. 
Dec.    i,   1919. 

CONTENTS 

I.    SKETCH    OF   ATHENIAN    HISTORY  (cc.  1-41). 

CH. 

1.  Condemnation  [of  the  Alcmeonidae].     Purification  of  the  city  by 

Epimenides. 

2.  Oligarchical  constitution  of  the  country,  and  miserable  economic 

condition  of  the  populace. 

3.  Summary  of  pre-Draconian  constitution.     Origin  of  the  Archons  ; 

duration  of  their  office,  and  their  official  residences.  Predomi 
nant  position  of  the  Areopagus  as  guardian  of  the  constitution. 

4.  The   constitution   of  Draco :    the   franchise  given   to   those  who 

could  furnish  a  military  equipment.  Qualifications  of  Archons, 
Treasurers,  Strategi,  and  Hipparchi.  Council  of  401.  Classi 
fication  of  the  population  on  a  property  basis.  Position  of 
Areopagus  maintained. 

5.  Political  strife,  leading  to  appointment  of  Solon  as  mediator  and 

Archon  :  his  own  description  of  his  task. 

6.  The  Seisachtheia. 

7.  The  constitution  of  Solon. 

The  property  classes. 

Mode  of  election  of  magistrates.  Tribes,  Trittyes,  and  Nau- 
craries.  Council  of  400.  Council  of  Areopagus ;  its  powers 
of  supervision.  Penalty  for  indifference  in  times  of  civil 
strife. 

9.  Democratic  features  :  (i)  prohibition  of  loans  secured  on  the 

debtor's  person  ;  (2)  general  right  to  claim  redress  of  wrong  ; 
(3)  the  appeal  to  the  jury-courts. 

10.  Solon's  reforms  of  the  currency  and  the  standards  of  weights  and 

measures. 

11.  Popular  opinion  on  Solon's  reforms. 

12.  Quotations  from  his  poems  to  illustrate  his  own  view  of  his  policy. 

13.  Continuance  of  political  strife.    Damasias's  coup  d'etat.    The  three 

political  parties :  (i)  the  Shore,  (2)  the  Plain,  (3)  the  Mountain. 

14.  Usurpation  of  Pisistratus  :  his  first  expulsion  and  restoration. 

15.  His  second  expulsion  and  final  restoration.     Disarmament  of 

the  people. 

1 6.  Characteristics  of  his  rule. 

17.  His  death  and  family. 

CONTENTS 

CH. 

18.  The  rule  of  the  Pisistratidae.     Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton. 

19.  Deterioration  of  the  tyrants'  administration.     Attacks  by  exiles, 

headed  by  Alcmeonidae  :  many  failures,  and  final  success  through 
the  Delphic  oracle  and  Spartan  help.  Expulsion  of  the  Pisis 
tratidae. 

20.  Cleisthenes  :  struggle  with  Isagoras,  backed  by  the  Spartans  under 

Cleomenes.  Final  expulsion  of  Spartans,  and  triumph  of  the 
people. 

21.  Reforms  of  Cleisthenes.     Establishment  of  ten  tribes:  Council  of 

500:  division  of  population  into  deme~,  grouped  in  trittyes. 

22.  The  law  of  ostracism :  its  application,  and  growth  of  popular 

control  of  politics.  Marathon  ;  the  mines  of  Maroneia  and 
the  building  of  a  navy  under  Theinistocles'  inspiration  ; 
Salamis. 

23.  Revival  of  Areopagus  through  its  efficiency  in   Persian  war  :   its 

good  administration.  Aristides  and  Theinistocles.  The  Ionian 
League. 

24.  Aristides  and  the  League  :  the  population  of  Athens  supported  by 

the  revenues  of  the  League. 

25.  Fall  of  the  Areopagus  :  Ephialtes  and  Theinistocles. 

26.  Increasing  laxity  of  administration,  due  to  political  demagogism. 

Inefficiency  of  aristocratic  leaders.  Zeugitae  made  eligible  for 
Archonship.  Institution  of  local  justices.  Restriction  of  fran 
chise  to  persons  of  citizen  birth  by  both  parents. 

27.  Rise  of  Pericles.     Outbreak  of  Peloponnesian  War.     Institution  of 

pay  for  services  in  law-courts,  leading  eventually  to  public 
demoralization  and  corruption. 

28.  Growth  of  demagogism  after  Pericles'  death.     Summary  of  party 

leaderships  from  time  of  Solon.  Deterioration  of  popular  leaders  : 
Cleon,  Cleophon,  and  progenies  uitiosior.  The  best  statesmen 
of  these  later  times,  Nicias,  Thucydides,  and  Theramenes. 

29.  Fall  of  the  democracy.     Constitution  of  the  Four  Hundred  :  stages 

in  its  establishment : 

(a)  Committee  of  30:    recommend  Constituent  Assembly  of 
Five  Thousand. 

30.  (K)  The  Five  Thousand  appoint  100  commissioners  to  draft 

constitution.     These    draw    up    (T)   a  constitution   for   the 
future,  with  Councils  composed  of  men  over  30,  and 
•JL  (2)  a  scheme  for  immediate  adoption,  based  on  a  Council 

of  Four  Hundred  with  full  powers  of  administration. 

32.  Rule  of  the  Four  Hundred  ;  failure  of  negotiations  with  Sparta. 

33.  Loss  of  Euboea  ;  fall  of  Four  Hundred  :  the  government  entrusted 

to  the  Five  Thousand,  with  good  results.  The  Revolution  led 
by  Theramenes. 

34.  The  Five  Thousand  dispossessed :  the  popular  Assembly  resumes 

control.     Battle  of  A^ginusae.     Spartan  offer  of  peace  rejected. 

CONTENTS 

CH. 

Battle  of  Aegospotami :  fall  of  Athens.     The  Thirty  established 
in  power  by  Lysander. 

35.  Rule  of  the  Thirty  :  rapid  deterioration. 

36.  Opposition  of  Theramenes:  nominal  Assembly  of  Three  Thousand. 

37.  Thrasybulus  and  the  exiles  at  Phyle.     Execution  of  Theramenes, 

and  admission  of  Spartan  garrison. 

38.  Defeat  and  deposition  of  the  Thirty.     Council  of  Ten.     Defection 

of  the  populace.     Second  Council  of  Ten,  which  restores  peace. 

39.  Terms  of  reconciJiation :  settlement  of  partisans  of  the  Thirty  at 

Eleusis. 

40.  The  restored  democracy  ;  statesmanlike  action  of  Archinus.     End 

of  the  secession  to  Eleusis. 

41.  Recapitulation  of  successive  constitutions,  from  Ion  to  the  restored 

democracy.     Payment  for  attendance  at  the  Assembly. 

II.  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  ATHENS  IN  THE 
FOURTH  CENTURY. 

42.  Admission  to  the  franchise  :  the  training  of  the  youths. 

43.  The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  :  its  Prytanes.     The  programme  of 

the  Assembly. 

44.  President  of  the  Prytanes  :  the  Proedri. 

45-  Criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  Council ;  its  limitation  to  prelimi 

nary  investigation. 
Examination  of  magistrates,  similarly  limited. 

46.  Examination  of  naval  programme,  and  inspection  of  public 

buildings. 

47.  Co-operation  with  other  magistrates  : 

(a)  The  Treasurers. 

(b)  The  Poletae  [Commissioners  for  Public  Contracts]. 
4^.              (c)  The  Apodectae  (Receivers-General]. 

(d)  The  Logistae  [Auditors]. 

(e)  The  Euthuni  [Examiners  of  Accounts]. 

49-  (/)  The  Catalogeis  [Commissioners  of  Enrolment].    Inspec 

tion  of  cavalry  horses. 
(g)  The  Military  Treasurer. 
(h)  Examination  of  paupers. 

50.  Commissioners  for  Repairs  of  Temples. 
Astynomi  [City  Commissioners]. 

51.  Agoranomi  [Market  Commissioners]. 

Metronomi  [Commissioners  of  Weights  and  Measures]. 
Sitophylaces  [Corn  Commissioners]. 
Superintendents  of  the  Mart. 

52.  The  Eleven  [Gaol  Commissioners], 
Eisagogeis  [Introducers  of  Cases]. 

CONTENTS 

CH. 

53.  The  Forty  [Local  Justices]. 
Arbitrators. 

Eponymi. 

54.  Hodopoei  [Commissioners  of  Roads]. 
Auditors. 

Clerks  of  the  Assembly. 

Hieropoei  [Commissioners  of  Public  Worship]. 

Commissioners  of  Festivals. 

Magistrates  for  Salamis  and  Piraeus. 

55.  The  Archons  :  formalities  of  their  election. 

56.  (a)  The  Archon  :  appointment  of  Choregi ;  share  in  admini 

stration  of  festivals  ;  suits  which  are  heard  before  him. 

57.  (b)  The  King  :  superintendence  of  the  mysteries  and  Lenaea: 

trials  for  homicide. 

58.  (c)  The  Polemarch  :  his  religious  functions  and  jurisdiction  in 

actions  respecting  non-citizens. 

59.  (d)  The  Thesmothetae  :  their  legal  functions. 

60.  Athlothetae  [Commissioners  of  Games] :   the  oil  from  the  sacred 

olives. 

61.  Military   officials:     (a)   Strategi,    (b)  Taxiarchs,    (c)   Hipparchs, 

(d]  Phylarchs. 

62.  Modes  of  election. 
Pay  for  various  offices. 

63-69.  Procedure  in  the  law-courts. 

63.  The  apparatus.     Qualifications  for  service  as  jurors.     Tickets. 

64.  Selection  of  jurors,  and  assignment  to  courts. 

65.  Precautions  against  packing  of  juries. 

66.  Allotment  of  presiding  magistrates. 

Selection  of  controller  of  the  clock  and  counters  of  votes. 

67.  Allotment  of  time  to  the  litigants. 

68.  Size  of  juries.     Form  of  ballot  balls.     Method  of  voting. 

69.  Counting  of  votes.     Payment  of  jurors. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

.  .  .  [They l  were  tried]  by  a  court  empanelled  from  among  i 
the  noble  families,  and  sworn  upon  the  sacrifices.  The  part  of 
accuser  was  taken  by  Myron.  They  were  found  guilty  of  the 
sacrilege,  and  their  bodies  were  cast  out  of  their  graves  and 
their  race  banished  for  evermore.  In  view  of  this  expiation  2, 
Epimenides  the  Cretan  performed  a  purification  of  the  city. 

After  this  event  there  was  contention  for  a  long  time  2 
between  the  upper  classes  and  the  populace.  Not  only  was  2 
the  constitution  at  this  time  oligarchical  in  every  respect, 
but  the  poorer  classes,  men,  women,  and  children,  were  the 
serfs  of  the  rich.  They  were  known  as  Pelatae  and  also 
as  Hectemori,3  because  they  cultivated  the  lands  of  the 
rich  at  the  rent  thus  indicated.  The  whole  country  was 
in  the  hands  of  a  few  persons,  and  if  the  tenants  failed 
to  pay  their  rent  they  were  liable  to  be  haled  into  slavery, 
and  their  children  with  them.  All  loans  were  secured  upon 
the  debtor's  person,  a  custom  which  prevailed  until  the 

1  The  narrative  opens  with  the  trial  of  the  Alcmeonidae  for  sacrilege. 
Cylon,  a  young  noble,  had  attempted  to  seize  despotic  power  by  force  ; 
but  his  attempt  failed,  and  his  adherents  fled  to  sanctuary,  which  they 
were  only  induced  to  leave  under  a  safe  conduct.  This  was  violated 
by  the  archon  Megacles,  one  of  the  great  house  of  the  Alcmeonidae, 
who  caused  them  all  to  be  put  to  death;  a  sacrilege  which  was 
supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  the  misfortunes  which  subsequently  befell 
Athens,  until  the  Alcmeonidae  submitted  themselves  to  trial.  The 
date  of  Cylon's  attempt  to  set  himself  up  as  tyrant  is  shown  by  this 
treatise  to  have  been  before  the  time  of  Draco ;  and,  as  Cylon  was  an 
Olympic  victor  in  640  B.C.,  and  was  apparently  still  a  young  man  at 
the  tune  of  his  attempt,  the  latter  (which  took  place  in  an  Olympic  year) 
may  be  assigned  to  632  B.C.  The  expulsion  of  the  Alcmeonidae  did 
not  take  place  till  many  years  afterwards  ;  the  visit  of  Epimenides 
probably  took  place  about -596  B.C.,  shortly  before  the  legislation 
of  Solon.  Aristotle  is  here  carrying  down  the  story  of  Cylon's 
attempt  to  its  conclusion,  and  he  subsequently  goes  back  to  the 
reforms  of  Draco. 

-  Or  '  in  addition  '  ;  but  the  order  of  the  words  is  in  favour  of  the 
other  interpretation. 

s  i.e.  those  who  paid  a  sixth  portion.  Some  scholars,  however, 
interpret  it  to  mean  tenants  who  received  only  a  sixth  part  of  the 
produce,  and  paid  five-sixths  to  their  landlords. 

6*5.20  3 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

time  of  Solon,  who  was  the  first  to  appear  as  the  champion 
3  of  the  people.  But  the  hardest  and  bitterest  part  of  the 
constitution  in  the  eyes  of  the  masses  was  their  state  of 
serfdom.  Not  but  what  they  were  also  discontented  with 
every  other  feature  of  their  lot ;  for,  to  speak  generally,  they 
had  no  part  nor  share  in  anything. 

3  Now  the  ancient  constitution,  as  it  existed  before  the  time 
of  Draco,  was  organized  as  follows.  The  magistrates  were 
elected  according  to  qualifications  of  birth  and  wealth.  At 
first  they  governed  for  life,  but  subsequently  for  terms 

a  of  ten  years.1  The  first  magistrates,  both  in  date  and  in 
importance,  were  the  King,  the  Polemarch,  and  the  Archon. 
The  earliest  of  these  offices  was  that  of  the  King,  which 
existed  from  ancestral  antiquity.  To  this  was  added, 
secondly,  the  office  of  Polemarch,  on  account  of  some  of  the 
kings  proving  feeble  in  war  ;  for  it  was  on  this  account  that 
Ion  2  was  invited  to  accept  the  post  on  an  occasion  of  press- 

3  ing  need.  The  last  of  the  three  offices  was  that  of  the 
Archon,  which  most  authorities  state  to  have  come  into 
existence  in  the  time  of  Medon.  Others  assign  it  to  the 
time  of  Acastus,3  and  adduce  as  proof  the  fact  that  the  nine 
Archons  swear  to  execute  their  oaths  '  as  in  the  days  of 
Acastus ',  which  seems  to  suggest  that  it  was  in  his  time 

1  The  absolute  monarchy  appears  to  have  ended  with  Codrus,  whose 
traditional  date  is  about  1066  B.C.  With  the  accession  of  his  son, 
Medon,  a  change  was  evidently  made  in  the  nature  of  the  kingly 
power,  which  is  described  in  the  following  sentences.  The  office  of 
Polemarch  was  already  in  existence  ;  but  at  this  date  the  third  office, 
that  of  Archon,  was  created,  and,  according  to  Aristotle,  the  descendants 
of  Codrus  agreed  to  surrender  the  kingship,  taking  in  exchange  the 
archonship,  to  which  the  more  important  functions  of  the  king  had 
been  transferred.  This  agrees  with  the  tradition  that  the  kingship  was 
abolished  after  the  death  of  Codrus,  though  in  fact  it  did  not  absolutely 
cease  to  exist,  but  was  reduced  to  the  second  rank,  retaining  little 
except  sacrificial  functions.  In  752  B.C.  the  term  of  the  Archon  was 
limited  to  ten  years,  the  election  being  still  confined  to  members  of  the 
royal  house.  After  four  Archons  had  ruled  on  these  conditions,  the 
office  was  thrown  open  to  all  the  Eupatridae,  or  nobles  ;  and  in  682  B.C. 
the  board  of  nine  annual  Archons  was  substituted  for  the  decennial 
Archon. 

"  Ion  was  said  to  have  come  to  the  assistance  of  his  grandfather 
Erechtheus,  when  the  latter  was  engaged  in  war  with  Eumolpus  of 
Eleusis,  and  to  have  been  made  Polemarch,  or  commandcr-in-chief,  of 
the  Athenians. 

s  The  successor  of  Medon. 

CHAPTER  3 

that  the  descendants  of  Codrus  retired  from  the  kingship  in 
return  for  the  prerogatives  conferred  upon  the  Archon. 
Whichever  way  it  be,  the  difference  in  date  is  small ;  but  that 
it  was  the  last  of  these  magistracies  to  be  created  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  the  Archon  has  no  part  in  the  ancestral  sacri 
fices,  as  the  King  and  the  Polemarch  have,  but  exclusively 
in  those  of  later  origin.  So  it  is  only  at  a  comparatively 
late  date  that  the  office  of  Archon  has  become  of  great 
importance,  through  the  dignity  conferred  by  these  later 
additions.  The  Thesmothetae l  were  appointed  many  years  4 
afterwards,  when  these  offices  had  already  become  annual, 
with  the  object  that  they  might  publicly  record  all  legal 
decisions,  and  act  as  guardians  of  them  with  a  view 
to  determining  the  issues  between  litigants.  Accordingly 
their  office,  alone  of  those  which  have  been  mentioned,  was 
never  of  more  than  annual  duration. 

Such,  then,  is  the  relative  chronological  precedence  of  5 
these  offices.  At  that  time  the  nine  Archons  did  not  all 
live  together.  The  King  occupied  the  building  now  known 
as  the  Bucolium,  near  the  Prytaneum,  as  may  be  seen  from 
the  fact  that  even  to  the  present  day  the  marriage  of  the 
King's  wife  to  Dionysus2  takes  place  there.  The  Archon 
lived  in  the  Prytaneum,  the  Polemarch  in  the  Epilyceum. 
The  latter  building  was  formerly  called  the  Polemarcheum, 
but  after  Epilycus,  during  his  term  of  office  as  Polemarch, 
had  rebuilt  it  and  fitted  it  up,  it  was  called  the  Epilyceum. 
The  Thesmothetae  occupied  the  Thesmotheteum.  In  the 
time  of  Solon,  however,  they  all  came  together  into  the 
Thesmotheteum.  They  had  power  to  decide  cases  finally 
on  their  own  authority,  not,  as  now,  merely  to  hold  a  pre 
liminary  hearing.  Such  then  was  the  arrangement  of  the 
magistracies.  The  Council  of  Areopagus  had  as  its  constitu-  6 
tionally  assigned  duty  the  protection  of  the  laws ;  but  in 
point  of  fact  it  administered  the  greater  and  most  important 
part  of  the  government  of  the  state,  and  inflicted  personal 
punishments  and  fines  summarily  upon  all  who  misbehaved 

1  The  six  junior  Archons. 

*  The  wife  of  the  King-archon  every  year  went  through  the  ceremony 
of  marriage  to  the  god  Dionysus,  at  the  feast  of  the  Anthesteria. 

B   2 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

themselves.  This  was  the  natural  consequence  of  the  facts 
that  the  Archons  were  elected  under  qualifications  of  birth 
and  wealth,  and  that  the  Areopagus  was  composed  of  those 
who  had  served  as  Archons;  for  which  latter  reason  the 
membership  of  the  Areopagus  is  the  only  office  which  has 
continued  to  be  a  life-magistracy  to  the  present  day. 

4  Such  was,  in  outline,  the  first  constitution,  but  not  very 
long  after  the  events  above  recorded,  in  the  archonship 
of  Aristaichmus,1  Draco  enacted  his  ordinances.  Now 
his  constitution  had  the  following  form.  The  franchise 
was  given  to  all  who  could  furnish  themselves  with  a 

a  military  equipment.  The  nine  Archons  and  the  Treasurers 
were  elected  by  this  body  from  persons  possessing  an 
unencumbered  property  of  not  less  than  ten  minas,  the  less 
important  officials  from  those  who  could  furnish  themselves 
with  a  military  equipment,  and  the  generals  [Strategi]  and 
commanders  of  the  cavalry  [Hipparchi]  from  those  who 
could  show  an  unencumbered  property  of  not  less  than 
a  hundred  minas,  and  had  children  born  in  lawful  wedlock 
over  ten  years  of  age.  These  officers  were  required  to  hold 
to  bail  the  Prytanes,  the  Strategi,  and  the  Hipparchi  of  the 
preceding  year  until  their  accounts  had  been  au  Hted.  talcing 
four  securities  of  the  same  class  as  that  to  which  the  Strategi 

3  and    the    Hipparchi    belonged.      There  was  also  to  be   a 
Council,  consisting  of  four  hundred  and  one  members,  elected 
by  lot  from  among  those  who  possessed  the  franchise.     Both 
for  this  and  for  the  other  magistracies2  the  lot  was  cast 
among  those  who  were  over  thirty  years  of  age ;  and  no 
one  might  hold  office  twice  until  every  one  else  had  had  his 
turn,  after  which  they  were  to  cast  the  lot  afresh.     If  any 
member  of  the  Council  failed  to  attend  when  there  was  a  sit 
ting  of  the  Council  or  of  the  Assembly,  he  paid  a  fine,  to  the 
amount  of  three  drachmas  if  he  was  a  Pentacosiomedimnus,3 

4  two  if  he  was  a  Knight,  and  one  if  he  was  a  Zeugites.     The 

1  The  name  of  this  Archon  is' not  otherwise  known,  but  the  tradi 
tional  date  of  Draco  is  621  B.  C. 

3  i  e.  the  other  magistracies  to  which  election  was  made  by  lot. 
does  not  mean  that  all  the  magistrates  were  at  this  time  elected  by  lot, 
which  certainly  was  not  the  case. 

••  The  meanings  of  these  terms  are  explained  in  ch.  7,  4. 

CHAPTER   4 

Council  of  Areopagus  was  guardian  of  the  laws,  and  kept 
watch  over  the  magistrates  to  see  that  they  executed  their 
offices  in  accordance  with  the  laws.  Any  person  who  felt 
himself  wronged  might  lay  an  information  before  the  Council 
of  Areopagus,  on  declaring  what  law  was  broken  by  the 
wrong  done  to  him.  But,  as  has  been  said  before,1  loans  5 
were  secured  upon  the  persons  of  the  debtors,  and  the  land 
was  in  the  hands  of  a  few. 

Since  such,  then,  was  the  organization  of  the  constitu-  5 
tion,  and  the  many  were  in  slavery  to  the  few,  the  people 
rose   against  the  upper  class.      The  strife  was  keen,  and  2 
for  a  long   time  the    two    parties    were    ranged  in    hostile 
camps  against  one  another,  till  at  last,2  by  common  consent, 
they  appointed  Solon  to  be  mediator  and  Archon,  and  com 
mitted  the  whole  constitution  to  his  hands.     The  immediate 
occasion  of  his  appointment  was  his  poem,  which  begins 
with  the  words  : 

I  behold,  and  within  my  heart  deep  sadness  has  claimed 

its  place, 

As  I  mark  the  oldest  home  of  the  ancient  Ionian  race 
Slain  by  the  sword.3 

In  this  poem  he  fights  and  disputes  on  behalf  of  each 
party  in  turn  against  the  other,  and  finally  he  advises  them 
to  come  to  terms  and  put  an  end  to  the  quarrel  existing 
between  them.  By  birth  and  reputation  Solon  was  one  of  3 
the  foremost  men  of  the  day,  but  in  wealth  and  position  he 
was  of  the  middle  class,  as  is  generally  agreed,  and  is,  indeed, 
established  by  his  own  evidence  in  these  poems,  where  he 
exhorts  the  wealthy  not  to  be  grasping. 
But  ye  who  have  store  of  good,  who  are  sated  and  'overflow, 
Restrain  your  swelling  soul,  and  still  it  and  keep  it  low : 
Let  the  heart  that  is  great  within  you  be  trained  a 

lowlier  way  ; 

Ye  shall  not  have  all  at  your  will,  and  we  will    not    for 
ever  obey. 

1  Ch.  2,  2. 

2  The  traditional  date  for  Solon's  legislation  is  594  B.  c. 

8  A  passage  of  considerable  length,  which  evidently  comes  from  the 
same  poem,  is  quoted  by  Demosthenes  (de  Fats.  Leg.  ch.  255),  but  this 
beginning  of  it  is  not  otherwise  known,  nor  yet  the  four  lines  quoted 
just  below. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

Indeed,  he  constantly  fastens  the  blame  of  the  conflict  on 
the  rich  ;  and  accordingly  at  the  beginning  of  the  poem  he 
says  that  he  fears  '  the  love  of  wealth  and  an  overweening 
mind  ',  evidently  meaning  that  it  was  through  these  that  the 
quarrel  arose. 

6  As  soon  as  he  -was  at  the  head  of  affairs,  Solon  liberated 
the  people  once  and  for  all,  by  prohibiting  all  loans  on 
the  security  of  the  debtor's  person:  and  in  addition  he 
made  laws  by  which  he  cancelled  all  debts,  public  and 
private.  This  measure  is  commonly  called  the  Seisachtheia 
[=  removal  of  burdens],  since  thereby  the  people  had  their 

a  loads  removed  from  them.  In  connexion  with  it  some  per 
sons  try  to  traduce  the  character  of  Solon.  It  so  happened 
that,  when  he  was  about  to  enact  the  Seisachtheia,  he  com 
municated  his  intention  to  some  members  of  the  upper  class, 
whereupon,  as  the  partisans  of  the  popular  party  say,  his 
friends  stole  a  march  on  him  ;  while  those  who  wish  to  attack 
his  character  maintain  that  he  too  had  a  share  in  the  fraud 
himself.  For  these  persons  borrowed  money  and  bought  up 
a  large  amount  of  land,  and  so  when,  a  short  time  afterwards, 
all  debts  were  cancelled,  they  became  wealthy;  and  this, 
they  say,  was  the  origin  of  the  families  which  were  afterwards 
looked  on  as  having  been  wealthy  from  primeval  times. 

3  However,  the  story  of  the  popular  party  is  by  far  the  most 
probable.     A  man  who  was  so  moderate  and  public-spirited 
in  all  his  other  actions,  that  when  it  was  within  his  power  to 
put  his  fellow-citizens  beneath  his  feet  and  establish  himself 
as  tyrant,  he  preferred  instead  to  incur  the  hostility  of  both 
parties  by  placing  his  honour  and  the  general  welfare  above 
his  personal  aggrandisement,  is  not  likely  to  have  consented 
to   defile  his    hands  by  such  a  petty  and  palpable  fraud. 

4  That  he  had  this  absolute  power  is,  in  the  first  place,  indi 
cated  by  the  desperate  condition  of  the  country  ;  moreover, 
he  mentions  it  himself  repeatedly  in  his  poems,  and  it  is 
universally  admitted.     We  are  therefore  bound  to  consider 
this  accusation  to  be  false. 

7      Next  Solon  drew   up   a    constitution  and  enacted    new 
laws ;  and  the  ordinances  of  Draco  ceased  to  be  used,  with 

CHAPTKR   7 

the  exception  of  those  relating  to  murder.  The  laws  were 
inscribed  on  the  wooden  stands,1  and  set  up  in  the  King's 
Porch,  and  all  swore  to  obey  them  ;  and  the  nine  Archons 
made  oath  upon  the  stone,2  declaring  that  they  would  dedi 
cate  a  golden  statue  if  they  should  transgress  any  of  them. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  oath  to  that  effect  which  they  take 
to  the  present  day.  Solon  ratified  his  laws  for  a  hundred  3 
years  ;  and  the  following  was  the  fashion 'in  which  he  organ 
ized  the  constitution.  He  divided  the  population  according  3 
to  property  into  four  classes,  just  as  it  had  been  divided 
before,  namely,  Pentacosiomedimni,  Knights,  Zeugitae,  and 
Thetes.3  The  various  magistracies,  namely,  the  nine  Archons, 
the  Treasurers,  the  Commissioners  for '  Public  Contracts 
[Poletae],  the  Eleven,4  and  the  Exchequer  Clerks  [Colacre- 
tae],5he  assigned  to  the  Pentacosiomedimni,  the  Knights,  and 
the  Zeugitae,  giving  offices  to  each  class  in  proportion  to  the 
value  of  their  rateable  property.  To  those  who  ranked 
among  the  Thetes  he  gave  nothing  but  a  place  in  the 
Assembly  and  in  the  juries.  A  man  had  to  rank  as  4 
a  Pentacosiomedimnus  if  he  made,  from  his  own  land,  five 
hundred  measures,  whether  liquid  or  solid.  Those  ranked 
as  Knights  who  made  three  hundred  measures,  or,  as  some 
say,  those  who  were  able  to  maintain  a  horse.  In  support 
of  the  latter  definition  they  adduce  the  name  of  the  class, 
which  may  be  supposed  to  be  derived  from  this  fact,  and 
also  some  votive  offerings  of  early  times ;  for  in  the  Acropolis 
there  is  a  votive  offering,  a  statue  of  Diphilus,6  bearing  this 
inscription : 

1  i.  e.  the  well-known  pillars,  which  were  formed  by  joining  together 
four  rectangular  tablets  made  of  wood. 

2  See  ch.  55,  5. 

3  The  name  Pentacosiomedimnus  means  one  who  possesses   500 
measures,  as  explained  in  the  text  below  ;  that  of  Knight,  or  Horseman, 
implies  ability  to  keep  a  horse ;  that  of  Zeugites,  ability  to  keep  a 
yoke  of  oxen  ;  while  the  Thetes  were  originally  serfs  attached  to  the  soil. 

4  The  superintendents  of  the  state  prison  ;  see  ch.  52,  I. 

5  These  officers,  whose  original  function  was  said  to  have  been  to 
'  collect  the  pieces  after  a  sacrifice  ',  were  the  Treasury  officials  in  early 
times,  who  received  the  taxes  and  handed  them  over  to  be  kept  by  the 
Treasurers.      In  later  times  the  Colacretae  seem  to  have  ceased   to 
exist,  and  they  are  not  mentioned  in  Aristotle's  enumeration  of  the 
officials  in  his  own  day. 

fi  Mr.  A.  S.  Murray  has  pointed  out  that  this  must  be  a  mistake, 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

The  son  of  Diphilus,  Anthemion  hight, 
Raised  from  the  Thetes  and  become  a  Knight, 
Did  to  the  gods  this  sculptured  charger  bring, 
For  his  promotion  a  thank-offering. 

And  a  horse  stands  in  evidence  beside  the  man,  imply  ing  that 
this  was  what  was  meant  by  belonging  to  the  rank  of  Knight. 
Atthe  sametime  it  seems  reasonable  tosuppose  that  this  class, 
like  the  Pentacosiomedimni,  was  defined  by  the  possession 
of  an  income  of  a  certain  number  of  measures.  Those 
ranked  as  Zeugitae  who  made  two  hundred  measures,  liquid 
or  solid  ;  and  the  rest  ranked  as  Thetes.  and  were  not  eligible 
for  any  office.  Hence  it  is  that  even  at  the  present  day,  when 
a  candidate  for  any  office  is  asked  to  what  class  he  belongs, 
no  one  would  think  of  saying  that  he  belonged  to  the  Thetes. 

8  The  elections  to  the  various  offices  Solon  enacted  should 
be  by  lot,  out  of  candidates  selected  by  each  of  the  tribes. 
Each  tribe  selected  ten  candidates  for  the  nine  archonships, 
and  among  these  the  lot  was  cast.  Hence  it  is  still  the 
custom  for  each  tribe  to  choose  ten  candidates  by  lot,  and 
then  the  lot  is  again  cast  among  these.  A  proof  that  Solon 
regulated  the  elections  to  office  according  to  the  property 
classes  may  be  found  in  the  law  still  in  force  with  regard  to 
the  Treasurers,  which  enacts  that  they  shall  be  chosen  from 

3  the  Pentacosiomedimni.1  Such  was  Solon's  legislation  with 
respect  to  the  nine  Archons  ;  whereas  in  early  times  the 
Council  of  Areopagus'-  summoned  suitable  persons  according 
to  its  own  judgement  and  appointed  them  for  the  year  to  the 

either  of  Aristotle,  or,  more  probably,  of  the  copyist.  The  statue  set 
up  by  Anthemion  must  have  been  his  own,  not  his  father's,  since  the 
latter,  as  the  inscription  proves,  could  not  properly  have  been  repre 
sented  with  a  horse,  as  he  was  only  a  member  of  the  Thetes.  We 
should  therefore  read  '  a  statue  of  Anthemion,  son  of  Diphilus  '. 

1  That  this  qualification  was,  in  Aristotle's  own  time,  purely  nominal 
appears  from  ch.  47,  I,  where  it  is  stated  that  the  person  on  whom  the 
lot  falls  holds  the  office,  be  he  ever  so  poor. 

2  This  statement  is  of  great  value,  as  nothing  was  previously  known 
concerning  the  way  in  which  the  Archons  and  other  magistrates  were 
appointed    previous    to   the    time   of  Solon.      The    elections   by   the 
Areopagus,  which  may  have  begun  as  early  as  the  first  successors  of 
Codrus,  apparently  lasted  till  the  reforms  of  Draco,  by  which  the 
franchise  was  conferred  on  all  who  could  furnish  a  military  equipment, 
and  the  magistrates  were  presumably  thenceforward  elected   in  the 
general  Ecclesia  or  Assembly. 

CHAPTER   8 

several  offices.  There  were  four  tribes,  as  before,  and  four 
tribe-kings.  Each  tribe  was  divided  into  three  Trittyes 
[=  Thirds],  with  twelve  Naucraries1  in  each;  and  the 
Naucraries  had  officers  of  their  own,  called  Naucrari,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  superintend  the  current  receipts  and  expendi 
ture.  Hence,  among  the  laws  of  Solon  now  obsolete,  it  is 
repeatedly  written  that  the  Naucrari  are  to  receive  and  to 
spend  out  of  the  Naucraric  fund.  Solon  also  appointed  a 

4 

Council  of  four  hundred,  a  hundred  from  each  tribe ;  but  he 
assigned  to  the  Council  of  the  Areopagus  the  duty  of  super 
intending  the  laws,  acting  as  before  as  the  guardian  of  the 
constitution  in  general.  It  kept  watch  over  the  affairs  of  the 
state  in  most  of  the  more  important  matters,  and  corrected 
offenders,  with  full  powers  to  inflict  either  fines  or  personal 
punishment.  The  money  received  in  fines  it  brought  up  into 
the  Acropolis,  without  assigning  the  reason  for  the  mulct. 
It  also  tried  those  who  conspired  for  the  overthrow  of  the 
state,  Solon  having  enacted  a  process  of  impeachment  to  deal 
with  such  offenders.  Further,  since  he  saw  the  state  often 
engaged  in  internal  disputes,  while  many  of  the  citizens  from5 
sheer  indifference  accepted  whatever  might  turn  up,  he  made 
a  law  with  express  reference  to  such  persons,  enacting  that 
any  one  who,  in  a  time  of  civil  factions,  did  not  take  up  arms 
with  either  party,  should  lose  his  rights  as  a  citizen  and 
cease  to  have  any  part  in  the  state. 

Such,  then,  was  his  legislation  concerning  the  magistracies. 
There  are  three  points  in  the  constitution  of  Solon  which 
appear  to  be  its  most  democratic  features :  first  and  most 
important,  the  prohibition  of  loans  on  the  security  of  the 
debtor's  person ;  secondly,  the  right  of  every  person  who 
so  willed  to  claim  redress  on  behalf  of  any  one  to  whom 
wrong  was  being  done ;  thirdly,  the  institution  of  the 
appeal  to  the  jury-courts ;  and  it  is  to  this  last,  they  say, 
that  the  masses  have  owed  their  strength  most  of  all,  since, 

1  It  appears  from  ch.  21,5  that  the  Naucraries  were  local  divisions, 
which,  under  the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes,  were  replaced  by  the 
demes.  The  division  of  tribes  into  Trittyes  and  Naucraries  existed 
before  the  time  of  Solon,  as  appears  from  Herodotus  (v.  71),  and  they 
are  only  mentioned  here  as  continuing  under  Solon's  constitution,  not 
as  created  by  him. 

ATHENIENS1UM    RESPUBLICA 

2  when  the  democracy  is  master  of  the  voting-power,  it  is  master 
of  the  constitution.  Moreover,  since  the  laws  were  not  drawn 
up  in  simple  and  explicit  terms  (but  like  the  one  concerning 
inheritances  and  wards  of  state),  disputes  inevitably  occurred, 
and  the  courts  had  to  decide  in  every  matter,  whether  public 
or  private.  Some  persons  in  fact  believe  that  Solon  deliber 
ately  made  the  laws  indefinite,  in  order  that  the  final 
decision  might  be  in  the  hands  of  the  people.  This,  how 
ever,  is  not  probable,  and  the  reason  no  doubt  was  that  it 
is  impossible  to  attain  ideal  perfection  when  framing  a  law 
in  general  terms ;  for  we  must  judge  of  his  intentions,  not 
from  the  actual  results  in  the  present  day,  but  from  the 
general  tenor  of  the  rest  of  his  legislation. 

o  These  seem  to  be  the  democratic  features  of  his  laws  ; 
but  in  addition,  before  the  period  of  his  legislation,  he 
carried  through  his  abolition  of  debts,  and  after  it  his  increase 
in  the  standards  of  weights  and  measures,  and  of  the  currency. 

2  During  his  administration  the  measures  were  made  larger 
than  those  of  Pheidon,  and  the  mina,  which  previously  had 
a  standard  of  seventy  drachmas,  was  raised  to  the  full 
hundred.1  The  standard  coin  in  earlier  times  was  the  two- 
drachma  piece.  He  also  made  weights  corresponding  with 
the  coinage,  sixty-three  minas  going  to  the  talent ;  and  the 
odd  three  minas  were  distributed  among  the  staters  and  the 
other  values.- 

II  When  he  had  completed  his  organization  of  the  constitution 
in  the  manner  that  has  been  described,  he  found  himself 
beset  by  people  coming  to  him  and  harassing  him  concerning 
his  laws,  criticizing  here  and  questioning  there,  till,  as  he 
wished  neither  to  alter  what  he  had  decided  on  nor  yet  to 
be  an  object  of  ill  will  to  every  one  by  remaining  in  Athens, 

1  This  is  a  somewhat  curious  way  of  expressing  the  fact  that  Solon 
substituted  the  Euboic  for  the  Aeginetan  standard  of  coinage.     Each 
mina  had  loo  drachmas  in  its  own  standard,  but  the  weight  of  the 
Aeginetan  mina  was  only  equivalent  to  70  Euboic  drachmas.      The 
object  of  the  change  was  to  encourage  trade  with  the  great  commercial 
cities  of  Euboea  and  with  Corinth. 

2  i.e.  the  talent  was  raised  by  one-twentieth  ;    it  still  consisted  of 
sixty  minas,  but  these  were  equal  to  sixty-three  of  the  old  minas,  and 
the  increase  was  distributed  proportionately  over  the  smaller  values, 
such  as  the  stater  (  =  four  drachmas). 

CHAPTER   ii 

he  set  off  on  a  journey  to  Egypt,  with  the  combined  objects 
of  trade  and  travel,  giving  out  that  he  should  not  return  for 
ten  years.  He  considered  that  there  was  no  call  for  him 
to  expound  the  laws  personally,  but  that  every  one  should 
obey  them  just  as  they  were  written.  Moreover,  his  a 
position  at  this  time  was  unpleasant.  Many  members 
of  the  upper  class  had  been  estranged  from  him  on  account 
of  his  abolition  of  debts,  and  both  parties  were  alienated 
through  their  disappointment  at  the  condition  of  things 
which  he  had  created.  The  mass  of  the  people  had 
expected  him  to  make  a  complete  redistribution  of  all 
property,  and  the  upper  class  hoped  he  would  restore 
everything  to  its  former  position,  or,  at  any  rate,  make  but 
a  small  change.  Solon,  however,  had  resisted  both  classes. 
He  might  have  made  himself  a  despot  by  attaching  himself 
to  whichever  party  he  chose,  but  he  preferred,  though  at  the 
cost  of  incurring  the  enmity  of  both,  to  be  the  saviour  of  his 
country  and  the  ideal  lawgiver. 

The  truth  of  this  view  of  Solon's  policy  is  established  12 
alike    by   common    consent,   and    by  the  mention  he  has 
himself  made  of  the  matter  in  his  poems.     Thus  : 

I   gave  to  the  mass  of  the  people  such  rank  as  befitted 

their  need, 
I  took   not    away  their  honour,  and  I  granted  naught  to 

their  greed  ; 
While  those  who  were  rich  in  power,  who  in  wealth  were 

glorious  and  great, 
I  bethought  me  that  naught  should  befall  them  unworthy 

their  splendour  and  state; 
So   I  stood  with   my   shield  outstretched,  and  both  were 

safe  in  its  sight, 
And  I  would  not  that   either  should   triumph,  when  the 

triumph  was  not  with  right. 

Again  he  declares  how  the  mass  of  the  people  ought  to  be  2 
treated  : 

But   thus  will  the  people  best  the  voice  of  their  leaders 
obey, 

When  neither  too  slack  is  the  rein,  nor  violence  holdeth 
the  sway  ; 

ATHENIENSIUM    RP:SPUBLICA 

For  indulgence  breedeth  a  child,  the  presumption  that 
spurns  control, 

When  riches  too  great  are  poured  upon  men  of  un 
balanced  soul. 

3  And   again  elsewhere  he  speaks  about  the  persons  who 
wished  to  redistribute  the  land  : 

So  they   came   in  search  of  plunder,   and    their   cravings 

knew  no  bound, 
Every  one  among  them    deeming   endless    wealth   would 

here  be  found, 

And  that  I  with  glozing  smoothness  hid  a  cruel  mind  within. 
Fondly  then  and  vainly  dreamt  they ;  now  they  raise  an 

angry  din, 
And  they  glare  askance  in   anger,   and   the  light    within 

their  eyes 
Burns    with   hostile    flames    upon    me.     Yet    therein    no 

justice  lies. 
All   I   promised,   fully  wrought   I   with  the  gods  at  hand 

to  cheer, 
Naught    beyond    in    folly   ventured.     Never   to   my   soul 

was  dear 

With  a  tyrant's  force  to  govern,  nor  to  see  the  good  and  base 
Side   by   side  in    equal    portion    share   the  rich    home   of 

our  race. 

4  Once  more  he  speaks  of  the  abolition  of  debts  and  of  those 
who  before  were  in  servitude,  but  were  released  owing  to  the 
Seisachtheia : 

Of  all  the  aims  for  which  I  summoned  forth 
The  people,  was  there  one  I  compassed  not? 
Thou,  when  slow  time  brings  justice  in  its  train, 

0  mighty  mother  of  the  Olympian  gods, 

Dark  Earth,  thou  best  canst  witness,  from  whose  breast 

1  swept  the  pillars  l  broadcast  planted  there, 

And  made  thee  free,  who  hadst  been  slave  of  yore. 
And  many  a  man  whom  fraud  or  law  had  sold 
Far  from  his  god-built  land,  an  outcast  slave, 
I  brought  again  to  Athens ;  yea,  and  some, 
Exiles  from  home  through  debt's  oppressive  load, 
Speaking  no  more  the  dear  Athenian  tongue, 
But  wandering  far  and  wide,  I  brought  again  ; 

1  These  were  the  pillars  set  up  on  mortgaged  lands,  to  record  the 
fact  of  the  encumbrance. 

CHAPTER   12 

And  those  that  here  in  vilest  slavery 

Crouched  'neath  a  master's  frown,  I  set  them  free. 

Thus  might  and  right  were  yoked  in  harmony, 

Since  by  the  force  of  law  I  won  my  ends 

And  kept  my  promise.     Equal  laws  I  gave 

To  evil  and  to  good,  with  even  hand 

Drawing  straight  justice  for  the  lot  of  each. 

But  had  another  held  the  goad  as  I, 

One  in  whose  heart  was  guile  and  greediness, 

He  had  not  kept  the  people  back  from  strife. 

For  had  I  granted,  now  what  pleased  the  one, 

Then  what  their  foes  devised  in  counterpoise, 

Of  many  a  man  this  state  had  been  bereft. 

Therefore  I  showed  my  might  on  every  side, 

Turning  at  bay  like  wolf  among  the  hounds. 

And  again  he  reviles  both  parties  for  their  grumblings  in  the  5 
times  that  followed  : 

Nay,  if  one  must  lay  blame  where  blame  is  due, 
Wer't  not  for  me,  the  people  ne'er  had  set 
Their  eyes  upon  these  blessings  e'en  in  dreams: — 
While  greater  men,  the  men  of  wealthier  life, 
Should  praise  me  and  should  court  me  as  their  friend. 

For  had  any  other  man,  he  says,  received  this  exalted  post, 

He  had  not  kept  the  people  back,  nor  ceased 
Till  he  had  robbed  the  richness  of  the  milk. 
But  I  stood  forth  a  landmark  in  the  midst, 
And  barred  the  foes  from  battle. 

Such,  then,  were  Solon's  reasons  for  his  departure  from  13 
the  country.  After  his  retirement  the  city  was  still  torn  by 
divisions.  For  four  years,  indeed,  they  lived  in  peace  ;  but 
in  the  fifth  year  after  Solon's  government  they  were  unable 
to  elect  an  Archon  on  account  of  their  dissensions,  and 
again  four  years  later  they  elected  no  Archon  for  the  same 
reason.  Subsequently,  after  a  similar  period  had  elapsed,  2 
Damasiaswas  elected  Archon;1  and  hegovernedfor  twoyears 
and  two  months,  until  he  was  forcibly  expelled  from  his 
office.  After  this  it  was  agreed,  as  a  compromise,  to  elect 
ten  Archons,  five  from  the  Eupatridae,  three  from  the 

1  Probably  in  582  B.C.  ;  but  several  varieties  of  calculation  are 
possible,  and  some  editors  omit  the  words  '  after  a  similar  period  had 
elapsed  '. 

ATHENTENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

Agroeci,  and  two  from  the  Demiurgi;1  and  they  ruled 
for  the  year  following  Damasias.  It  is  clear  from  this 
that  the  Archon  was  at  the  time  the  magistrate  who 
possessed  the  greatest  power,  since  it  is  always  in  connexion 

3  with   this   office   that    conflicts    are    seen    to    arise.      But 
altogether  they  were  in  a  continual  state  of  internal  disorder. 
Some  found  the  cause  and  justification  of  their  discontent 
in  the  abolition  of  debts,  because  thereby  they  had  been 
reduced    to    poverty;    others    were    dissatisfied    with   the 
political  constitution,  because  it  had  undergone  a  revolu 
tionary  change  ;  while  with  others  the  motive  was  found  in 

4  personal  rivalries  among  themselves.     The  parties  at  this 
time  were  three  in  number.     First  there  was  the  party  of 
the  Shore,  led  by  Megacles  the  son  of  Alcmeon,  which  was 
considered  to  aim  at  a  moderate  form  of  government ;  then 
there  were  the  men  of  the  Plain,  who  desired  an  oligarchy 
and  were  led  by  Lycurgus  ;  and  thirdly  there  were  the  men 
of  the  Highlands,  at  the  head  of  whom  was  Pisistratus,  who 

5  was  looked  on  as  an  extreme  democrat.     This  latter  party 
was  reinforced  by  those  who  had  been  deprived  of  the  debts 
due  to  them,  from  motives  of  poverty,  and  by  those  who 
were    not    of    pure    descent,    from    motives    of    personal 
apprehension.2     A  proof  of  this  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  after 
the  tyranny  was  overthrown   a  revision  was  made  of  the 
citizen-roll,  on  the  ground  that  many  persons  were  partaking 
in  the  franchise  without  having  a  right  to  it.     The  names 
given  to  the  respective  parties  were  derived  from  the  districts 
in  which  they  held  their  lands. 

I4  Pisistratus  had  the  reputation  of  being  an  extreme 
democrat,  and  he  also  had  distinguished  himself  greatly  in 
the  war  with  Megara.  Taking  advantage  of  this,  he 
wounded  himself,  and  by  representing  that  his  injuries  had 
been  inflicted  on  him  by  his  political  rivals,  he  persuaded 
the  people,  through  a  motion  proposed  by  Aristion,  to  grant 
him  a  bodyguard.  After  he  had  got  these  '  club-bearers ', 

1  Eupatridae  =  the  aristocrats,  Agroeci  =  the  country,  or  agricultural, 
party,  Demiurgi  =  the  handworkers,  or  labour  party. 

2  Sc.,  lest  their  right  to  the  franchise  should  be  disputed,  as  it  in  fact 
was  after  the  fall  of  the  Pisistratidae. 

CHAPTER   14 

as  they  were  called,  he  made  an  attack  with  them  on  the 
people  and  seized  the  Acropolis.  This  happened  in  the 
archonship  of  Corneas,  thirty-one  years  after  the  legislation 
of  Solon.  It  is  related  that,  when  Pisistratus  asked  for  his  a 
bodyguard,  Solon  opposed  the  request,  and  declared  that 
in  so  doing  he  proved  himself  wiser  than  half  the  people 
and  braver  than  the  rest, — wiser  than  those  who  did  not  see 
that  Pisistratus  designed  to  make  himself  tyrant,  and 
braver  than  those  who  saw  it  and  kept  silence.  But  when 
all  his  words  availed  nothing  he  carried  forth  his  armour 
and  set  it  up  in  front  of  his  house,  saying  that  he  had  helped 
his  country  so  far  as  lay  in  his  power  (he  was  already  a  very 
old  man),  and  that  he  called  on  all  others  to  do  the  same. 
Solon's  exhortations, however,  proved  fruitless,  and  Pisistratus  3 
assumed  the  sovereignty.  His  administration  was  more 
like  a  constitutional  government  than  the  rule  of  a  tyrant ; 
but  before  his  power  was  firmly  established,  the  adherents 
of  Megacles  and  Lycurgus  made  a  coalition  and  drove  him 
out.  This  took  place  in  the  archonship  of  Hegesias,  five 
years  after  the  first  establishment  of  his  rule.  Eleven  years  4 
later1  Megacles,  being  in  difficulties  in  a  party  struggle, 
again  opened  negotiations  with  Pisistratus,  proposing  that 
the  latter  should  marry  his  daughter  ;  and  on  these  terms 
he  brought  him  back  to  Athens,  by  a  very  primitive  and 
simple-minded  device.  He  first  spread  abroad  a  rumour 
that  Athena  was  bringing  back  Pisistratus,  and  then,  having 
found  a  woman  of  great  stature  and  beauty,  named  Phye 

There  is  some  error  in  Aristotle's  chronology  of  the  life  of 
Pisistratus.  for  while  he  states  below  that,  of  the  thirty-three  years 
between  his  first  accession  and  his  death,  nineteen  were  spent  in 
possession  of  the  tyranny  and  fourteen  in  exile,  in  the  actual  enumera 
tion  of  years  he  gives  twenty-one  years  of  exile  and  consequently  only 
twelve  of  rule,  of  which  only  one  can  be  assigned  to  his  last  period  of 
government,  which  is  always  spoken  of  as  the  longest.  It  is  therefore 
tolerably  certain  that  one  of  the  periods  of  exile  is  wrongly  dated  ;  and 
as  the  ten  years  of  the  second  exile  are  confirmed  by  Herodotus,  it  may 
be  concluded  that  the  eleven  years  here  assigned  to  the  first  exile  are 
wrong,  and  should  be  reduced  to  four.  It  should  be  noticed  that  in  the 
Politics  it  is  stated  that  Pisistratus  was  actually  in  power  only  seventeen 
years  out  of  the  thirty-three  ;  but  this  would  reduce  the  duration  of  his 
third  tenure  of  power  lower  than  is  at  all  probable,  unless  we  suppose 
that  the  length  of  the  two  earlier  terms  is  wrongly  given  here.  For  a 
statement  of  the  various  solutions  offered  by  different  commentators,  see 
Sandys  ad  loc. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RKSPUBLICA 

(according  to  Herodotus,  of  the  clemc  of  Paeania,  but  as 
others  say  a  Thracian  flower-seller  of  the  deme  of  Collytus), 
he  dressed  her  in  a  garb  resembling  that  of  the  goddess  and 
brought  her  into  the  citywith  Pisistratus.  The  latter  drove  in 
on  a  chariot  with  the  woman  beside  him,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  city,  struck  with  awe,  received  him  with  adoration. 

15  In  this  manner  did  his  first  return  take  place.  He  did 
not,  however,  hold  his  power  long,  for  about  six  years  after 
his  return  he  was  again  expelled.  He  refused  to  treat  the 
daughter  of  Megacles  as  his  wife,  and  being  afraid,  in  con 
sequence,  of  a  combination  of  the  two  opposing  parties,  he 

2  retired  from  the  country.     First  he  led  a  colony  to  a  place 
called  Rhaicelus,  in  the  region  of  the  Thermaic  gulf;    and 
thence  he  passed  to  the  country  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Mt.  Pangaeus.     Here  he  acquired  wealth  and  hired  mercen 
aries;  and  not  till  ten  years   had  elapsed   did  he  return 
to  Eretria  and  make  an  attempt  to  recover  the  government 
by  force.     In  this  he  had  the  assistance  of  many  allies, 
notably  the  Thebans  and  Lygdamis  of  Naxos,  and  also  the 
Knights  who  held  the  supreme  power  in  the  constitution  of 

3  Eretria.     After  his   victory   in    the   battle    at    Pallene   he 
captured  Athens,  and  when  he  had  disarmed  the  people  he 
at  last  had  his  tyranny  securely  established,  and.  was  able 

4  to  take  Naxos  and  set  up  Lygdamis  as  ruler  there.     He 
effected   the   disarmament  of  the  people  in  the  following 
manner.    He  ordered  a  parade  in  full  armour  in  the  Theseum, 
and  began  to  make  a  speech  to  the  people.     He  spoke  for 
a  short  time,  until  the  people  called  out  that  they  could 
not  hear  him,  whereupon  he  bade  them  come  up  to  the 
entrance  of  the  Acropolis,  in  order  that  his  voice  might 
be  better  heard.    Then,  while  he  continued  to  speak  to  them 
at   great   length,    men    whom    he    had    appointed  for  the 
purpose  collected  the  arms  and   locked    them  -up    in    the 
chambers  of  the  Theseum   hard  by,  and  came  and  made 

5  a  signal  to  him  that  it  was  done.  Pisistratus  accordingly, 
when  he  had  finished  the  rest  of  what  he  had  to  say,  told 
the  people  also  what  had  happened  to  their  arms ;  adding 
that  they  were  not  to  be  surprised  or  alarmed,  but  go  home 

CHAPTER    15 

and  attend  to  their  private  affairs,  while  he  would  himself 
for  the  future  manage  all  the  business  of  the  state. 

Such  was  the  origin   and   such  the   vicissitudes  of  the  16 
tyranny  of  Pisistratus.     His  administration  was  temperate,  a 
as    has    been    said    before,    and    more    like    constitutional 
government  than  a  tyranny.     Not  only  was   he  in   every 
respect  humane  and  mild  and  ready  to  forgive  those  who 
offended,    but,   in    addition,    he   advanced    money   to   the 
poorer  people  to  help  them  in  their  labours,  so  that  they 
might  make  their  living  by  agriculture.     Tn  this  he  had  two  3 
objects,  first  that  they  might  not  spend  their  time  in  the 
city  but  might  be  scattered  over  all  the  face  of  the  country, 
and  secondly  that,  being  moderately  well  off  and  occupied 
with  their  own  business,  they  might  have  neither  the  wish 
nor  the  time  to  attend  to  public  affairs.     At  the  same  time  4 
his  revenues  were  increased  by  the  thorough  cultivation  of 
the  country,  since  he  imposed  a  tax  of  one  tenth  on  all  the 
produce.     For  the   same  reasons    he    instituted   the   local  5 
justices,1  and  often  made  expeditions    in  person   into  the 
country  to  inspect  it  and  to  settle  disputes  between  indi 
viduals,  that  they  might  not  come  into  the  city  and  neglect 
their  farms.     It  was  in  one  of  these  progresses  that,  as  the  6 
story  goes,   Pisistratus  had   his   adventure  with  the    man 
of  Hymettus,    who    was    cultivating   the   spot    afterwards 
known  as  '  Tax-free  Farm '.     He  saw  a  man  digging  and 
working  at  a  very  stony  piece  of  ground,  and  being  surprised 
he  sent  his  attendant  to  ask  what  he  got  out  of  this  plot  of 
land.     '  Aches  and  pains  ',  said  the  man  ;    '  and  that's  what 
Pisistratus  ought  to  have  his  tenth  of.     The  man   spoke 
without  knowing  who  his  questioner  was ;   but  Pisistratus 
was  so  pleased  with  his  frank  speech  and  his  industry  that 
he  granted   him   exemption  from  all    taxes.     And    so    in  7 
matters  in   general  he  burdened   the    people   as    little   as 
possible  with  his  government,  but  always  cultivated  peace 
and  kept  them   in  all    quietness.     Hence   the  tyranny  of 
Pisistratus  was  often  spoken   of  proverbially  as   '  the  age 
of  gold '  ;  for  when  his  sons  succeeded  him  the  government 

1  See  ch.  53,  i,  where  it  is  stated  that  their  number  was  at  first  thirty, 
but  was  subsequently  increased  to  forty. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

8  became  much  harsher.     But  most  important  of  all  in  this 
respect  was  his  popular   and    kindly    disposition.     In    all 
things  he  was  accustomed   to  observe   the  laws,  without 
giving   himself  any  exceptional  privileges.     Once  he  was 
summoned  on  a  charge  of  homicide  before  the  Areopagus, 
and  he  appeared  in  person  to  make  his  defence ;  but  the 
prosecutor  was  afraid  to  present  himself  and  abandoned  the 

9  case.     For  these  reasons  he  held  power  long,  and  whenever 
he  was    expelled    he    regained    his    position    easily.     The 
majority  alike  of  the  upper  class  and  of  the  people  were  in 
his  favour ;  the  former  he  won  by  his  social  intercourse  with 
them,  the  latter  by  the  assistance  which  he  gave  to  their 
private  purses,  and  his  nature  fitted  him  to  win  the  hearts 

10  of  both.     Moreover,  the.  laws  in  reference  to  tyrants  at  that 
time  in  force  at  Athens  were  very  mild,  especially  the  one 
which   applies   more  particularly  to  the  establishment   of 
a  tyranny.  The  law  ran  as  follows  :  '  These  are  the  ancestral 
statutes  of  the  Athenians ;    if  any  persons  shall  make  an 
attempt  to  establish  a  tyranny,  or  if  any  person  shall  join 
in  setting  up  a  tyranny,  he  shall  lose  his  civic  rights,  both 
himself  and  his  whole  house.' 

I7  Thus  did  Pisistratus  grow  old  in  the  possession  of  power, 
and  he  died  a  natural  death  in  the  archonship  of  Philoneos,1 
three  and  thirty  years  from  the  time  at  which  he  first 
established  himself  as  tyrant,  during  nineteen  of  which  he 

2  was  in  possession  of  power ;  the  rest  he  spent  in  exile.     It 
is  evident  from  this  that  the  story  is  mere  gossip  which  states 
that   Pisistratus  was  the  youthful  favourite  of  Solon  and 
commanded  in  the   war  against  Megara  for  the  recovery 
of  Salamis.     It  will  not  harmonize  with  their  respective  ages, 
as  any  one  may  see  who  will  reckon  up  the  years  of  the  life 

3  of  each  of  them,  and  the  dates  at  which  they  died.     After 
the  death  of  Pisistratus  his  sons  took  up  the  government, 
and  conducted  it  on  the  same  system.     He  had  two  sons  by 
his  first  and  legitimate-  wife,  Hippias  and  Hipparchus,  and 
two  by  his  Argive  consort,  lophon  and  Hegesistratus,  who 

1  527  B.C. 

2  Pisistratus's  second  wife  was  a  foreigner,  and  therefore  not  legiti 
mate  according  to  strict  Athenian  law. 

CHAPTER    17 

was  surnamed  Thessalus.  For  Pisistratus  took  a  wife  from  4 
Argos,  Timonassa,  the  daughter  of  a  man  of  Argos,  named 
Gorgilus  ;  she  had  previously  been  the  wife  of  Archlnus  of 
Ambracia,  one  of  the  descendants  of  Cypselus.  This  was 
the  origin  of  his  friendship  with  the  Argives,  on  account  of 
which  a  thousand  of  them  were  brought  over  by  Hegesistratus 
and  fought  on  his  side  in  the  battle  at  Pallene.  Some 
authorities  say  that  this"  marriage  took  place  after  his  first 
expulsion  from  Athens,  others  while  he  was  in  possession 
of  the  government. 

Hippias  and  Hipparchus  assumed  the  control  of  affairs  on  18 
grounds  alike  of  standing  and  of  age  ;  but  Kippias,  as  being 
also  naturally  of  a  statesmanlike  and  shrewd  disposition, 
was  really  the  head  of  the  government.     Hipparchus  was 
youthful  in  disposition,  amorous,  and  fond  of  literature  (it 
was  he  who  invited  to  Athens  Anacreon.  Simonides,  and 
the  other  poets),  while  Thessalus  was  much  junior  in  age,  and  2 
was  violent  and  headstrong  in  his  behaviour.     It  was  from 
his  character  that  all  the  evils  arose  which  befell  the  house.1 
He  became  enamoured  of  Harmodius,  and,  since  he  failed 
to  win  his  affection,  he  lost  all  restraint  upon  his  passion,  and 
in  addition  to  other  exhibitions  of  rage  he  finally  prevented 
the  sister  of  Harmodius  from  taking  the  part  of  a  basket- 
bearer  in  the  Panathenaic  procession,  alleging  as  his  reason 
that  Harmodius  was  a  person  of  loose  life.     Thereupon,  in  a 
frenzy  of  wrath,  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton  did  their  cele 
brated  deed,  in  conjunction  with  a  number  of  confederates.2 
But  while  they  were  lying  in  wait  for  Hippias  in  the  Acropolis  3 
at  the  time  of  the  Panathenaea  (Hippias,  at  this  moment, 
was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  procession,  while  Hipparchus 
was  organizing  its  dispatch)  they  saw  one  of  the  persons 

1  This  is  a  direct  contradiction  of  the  narrative  of  Thucydides  (vi.  54) 
who  makes  Hipparchus  responsible  for  the  outrage  which  provoked  the' 
plot  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton.  It  is  impossible  to  say  positively 
which  is  right.  The  exact  details  would  be  known  to  few,  and  the 
fact  that  it  was  Hipparchus  who  was  killed  (though  Hippias,  and  not 
he,  was  the  person  aimed  at)  would  cause  men  to  believe  that  he  was 
the  person  to  blame. 

Thucydides  states  expressly  (vi.  56)  that  the  conspirators  were  few  in 
number.  Aristotle  probably  again  intends  to  correct  him,  silently 
but  pointedly. 

C    2 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

privy  to  the  plot  talking  familiarly  with  him.  Thinking 
that  he  was  betraying  them,  and  desiring  to  do  something 
before  they  were  arrested,  they  rushed  down  and  made  their 
attempt  without  waiting  for  the  rest  of  their  confederates. 
They  succeeded  in  killing  Hipparchus  near  the  Leocoreum 
while  he  was  engaged  in  arranging  the  procession,  but  ruined 

4  the   design  as   a  whole  ;    of  the    two  leaders.    Harmodius 
was  killed  on  the  spot  by  the  guard's,  while  Aristogeiton  was 
arrested,   and  perished  later   after  suffering  long  tortures. 
While  under  the  torture  he  accused   many  persons  who 
belonged  by  birth  to  the  most  distinguished  families  and 
were  also   personal  friends  of  the   tyrants.     At  first   the 
government  could  find  no  clue  to  the  conspiracy ;   for  the 
current  story,1  that  Hippias  made  all  who  were  taking  part 
in  the  procession  leave  their  arms,  and  then  detected  those 
who  were  carrying  secret  daggers,  cannot  be  true,  since  at 
that  time  they  did  not  bear  arms  in  the  processions,  this  being 
a  custom  instituted  at  a  later  period   by  the  democracy. 

5  According  to  the  story  of  the  popular  party,  Aristogeiton 
accused  the  friends  of  the  tyrants  with  the  deliberate  inten 
tion  that  the  latter  might  commit  an  impious  act,  and  at  the 
same  time  weaken  themselves,  by  putting  to  death  innocent 
men  who  were  their  own  friends  ;  others  say  that  he  told  no 

6  falsehood,  but  was  betraying  the  actual  accomplices.    At 
last,  when  for  all  his  efforts  he  could  not  obtain  release  by 
death,  he  promised  to  give  further  information  against  a 
number  of  other  persons;    and,  having  induced  Hippias  to 
give  him  his  hand  to  confirm  his  word,  as  soon  as  he  had 

o 

hold  of  it  he  reviled  him  for  giving  his  hand  to  the  murderer 
of  his  brother,  till  Hippias,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage,  lost  control  of 
himself  and  snatched  out  his  dagger  and  dispatched  him. 

19      After  this  event  the  tyranny  became  much  harsher.     In 

consequence  of  his  vengeance   for  his  brother,  and  of  the 

execution  and  banishment  of  a  large  number  of  persons, 

Hippias    became   a    distrusted    and    an    embittered    man. 

a  About  three  years  after  the  death  of  Hipparchus,  finding  his 

1  This  is  the  version  given  by  Thucydides  (vi.  58),  which  Aristotle 
evidently  again  wishes  to  correct. 

CHAPTER   19 

position  in  the  city  insecure,  he  set  about  fortifying 
Munichia,  with  the  intention  of  establishing  himself  there. 
While  he  was  still  engaged  on  this  work,  however,  he  was 
expelled  by  Cleomenes,  king  of  Lacedaemon,  in  consequence 
of  the  Spartans  being  continually  incited  by  oracles  to 
overthrow  the  tyranny.  These  oracles  \vere  obtained  in  the 
following  way.  The  Athenian  exiles,  headed  by  the  3 
Alcmeonidae,  could  not  by  their  own  power  effect  their 
return,  but  failed  continually  in  their  attempts.  Among 
their  other  failures,  they  fortified  a  post  in  Attica,  Lipsy* 
drium,  above  Mt.  Parnes,  and  were  there  joined  by  some 
partisans  from  the  city;  but  they  were  besieged  by  the 
tyrants  and  reduced  to  surrender.  After  this  disaster  the 
following  became  a  popular  drinking  song  : 

Ah  !  Lipsydrium,  faithless  friend  ! 
Lo,  what  heroes  to  death  didst  send, 
Nobly  born  and  great  in  deed  ! 
Well  did  they  prove  themselves  at  need 
Of  noble  sires  a  noble  seed. 

Having  failed,  then,  in  every  other  method,  they  took  the  4 
contract  for  rebuilding  the  temple  at  Delphi,1  thereby 
obtaining  ample  funds,  which  they  employed  to  secure  the 
help  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  All  this  time  the  Pythia  kept 
continually  enjoining  on  the  Lacedaemonians  who  came  to 
consult  the  oracle,  that  they  must  free  Athens  ;  till  finally 
she  succeeded  in  impelling  the  Spartans  to  that  step, 
although  the  house  of  Pisistratus  was  connected  with  them 
by  ties  of  hospitality.  The  resolution  of  the  Lacedaemon 
ians  was,  however,  at  least  equally  due  to  the  friendship 
which  had  been  formed  between  the  house  of  Pisistratus 
and  Argos.  Accordingly  they  first  sent  Anchimolus  by  sea  5 
at  the  head  of  an  army ;  but  he  was  defeated  and  killed, 
through  the  arrival  of  Cineas  of  Thessaly  to  support  the 
sons  of  Pisistratus  with  a  force  of  a  thousand  horsemen. 
Then,  being  roused  to  anger  by  this  disaster,  they  sent  their 
king,  Cleomenes,  by  land  at  the  head  of  a  larger  force  ;  and 
he,  after  defeating  the  Thessalian  cavalry  when  'they 

11  Dclphi  had  been  burnt' as  i 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

attempted  to  intercept  his  march  into  Attica,  .shut  up 
Hippias  within  what  was  known  as  the  Pelargic  wall  and 
blockaded  him  there  with  the  assistance  of  the  Athenians. 
6  While  he  was  sitting  down  before  the  place,  it  so  happened 
that  the  sons  of  the  Pisistratidae  were  captured  in  an 
attempt  to  slip  out ;  upon  which  the  tyrants  capitulated  on 
condition  of  the  safety  of  their  children,  and  surrendered 
the  Acropolis  to  the  Athenians,  five  days  being  first 
allowed  them  to  remove  their  effects.  This  took  place  in 
the  archonship  of  Harpactides,1  after  they  had  held  the 
tyranny  for  about  seventeen  years  since  their  father's  death, 
or  in  all,  including  the  period  of  their  father's  rule,  for  nine- 
and-forty  years. 

20  After  the  overthrow  of  the  tyranny,  the  rival  leaders  in 
the  state  were  Isagoras  son  of  Tisander,  a  partisan  of  the 
tyrants,  and  Cleisthenes,  who  belonged  to  the  family  of  the 
Alcmeonidae.  Cleisthenes,  being  beaten  in  the  political 
clubs,  called  in  the  people  by  giving  the  franchise  to  the 

2  masses.     Thereupon  Isagoras,  finding  himself  left  inferior 
in    power,    invited     Cleomenes,    who    was    united   to   him 
by  ties  of  hospitality,  to  return  to  Athens,  and  persuaded 
him  to  '  drive  out  the  pollution  ', 2  a  plea  derived  from  the 
fact  that  the  Alcmeonidae  were  supposed  to  be  under  the 

3  curse  of  pollution.     On  this   Cleisthenes   retired  from  the 
country,  and  Cleomenes,  entering  Attica  with  a  small  force, 
expelled,   as    polluted,   seven    hundred   Athenian  families. 
Having  effected  this,  he  next   attempted   to  dissolve  the 
Council,  and  to  set  up  Isagoras  and  three  hundred  of  his 
partisans  as  the  supreme  power  in  the  state.     The  Council, 
however,  resisted,  the  populace  flocked  together,  and  Cleo 
menes  and  Isagoras,  with  their  adherents,  took  refuge  in  the 
Acropolis.     Here  the  people  sat  down  and  besieged  them 
for  two  days  ;  and  on  the  third  they  agreed  to  let  Cleomenes 
and  all  his  followers  depart,  while  they  summoned  Cleisthenes 

4  and  the  other  exiles  back  to  Athens.     When  the  people  had 

1  The  Archon's  name  was  not  previously  known,  but  the  date  is 
established    independently   as   the  year    511-10   B.C.   (the  Athenian 
official  year  beginning  in  July),  apparently  in  the  spring  of  5 10  B.  C. 

2  i.  e.  to  expel  the  house  of  the  Alcmeonidae,  which  was  still  suppos 
to  be  polluted  by  the  sacrilege  in  the  the  affair  of  Cylon. 

CHAPTER    20 

thus  obtained  the  command  of  affairs,  Cleisthenes  was  their 
chief  and  popular  leader.  And  this  was  natural ;  for  the 
Alcmeonidae  were  perhaps  the  chief  cause  of  the  expulsion 
of  the  tyrants,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  their  rule  were 
at  perpetual  war  with  them.  But  even  earlier  than  the  5 
attempts  of  the  Alcmeonidae,  one  Cedon  made  an  attack 
on  the  tyrants  ;  whence  there  came  another  popular  drinking 
song,  addressed  to  him  : 

Pour  a  health  yet  again,  boy,  to  Cedon  ;    forget  not  this 

duty  to  do, 
If  a  health  is  an  honour  befitting  the  name  of  a  good 

man  and  true. 

The  people,  therefore,  had  good  reason  to  place  confidence  21 
in  Cleisthenes.     Accordingly,  now  that  he  was  the  popular 
leader,  three  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the  tyrants,  in  the 
archonship  of  Isagoras,1  his  first  step  was  to  distribute  the  2 
whole  population  into  ten  tribes  in  place  of  the  existing 
four,  with  the  object  of  intermixing  the   members  of  the 
different  tribes,  and  so  securing  that  more  persons  might 
have  a  share  in  the  franchise.2     From  this  arose  the  saying 
'  Do  not  look  at  the  tribes ',  addressed  to  those  who  wished 
to  scrutinize  the  lists  of  the  old  families.3     Next  he  made  3 
the  Council  to  consist  of  five  hundred  members  instead  of 
four  hundred,  each  tribe  now    contributing  fifty,  whereas 

1  508  B.  c. 

2  It  is  not  at  first  sight  evident  why  a  mere  redistribution  of  the 
population  into  ten  tribes  instead  of  four  should  give  more  persons 
a  share  in  the  franchise.     But  the  object  of  Cleisthenes  was  to  break 
down  the  old  family  and  tribal  feelings  on  which  political  contests  had 
hitherto  been  based.     To  do  this,  he  established  a  new  division  into 
tribes,  which  corresponded  to  no  existing  subdivision  of  the  old  ones, 
and  at  the  same  time  he  introduced  a  large  number  of  new  citizens  by 
the    enfranchisement    of   emancipated    slaves   and    resident    aliens. 
There  would  have  been  endless  difficulties  in  the  way  of  introducing 
them  into  the  old  tribes,  which  were  organized  into  clans  and  families 
on  the  old  aristocratic  basis  ;  but  they  were  easily  included  in  the  new 
tribes,  which  had  no  such  associations  connected  with  them. 

3  Apparently  this  means  that  since  the  tribes  now  bore  no  relation 
to  the  ancient  families,  it  was  useless  to  look  at  the  lists  of  the  tribes 
if  any  one   wished  to  examine  the  rolls  of  the  families.     Hence  the 
phrase  seems    to  have  become  a  proverbial  one  for  making  useless 
distinctions  or  refinements.      The  families  (together  with  the  larger 
units  known  as  phratries  or  clans)  were  ancient  divisions  of  the  four  old 
tribes,  on    the  basis  of  kinship,  and  mainly  for  social  and  religious 
purposes. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

formerly  each  had  sent  a  hundred.  The  reason  why  he  did 
not  organize  the  people  into  twelve  tribes  was  that  he  might 
not  have  to  use  the  existing  division  into  trittyes ;  for 
the  four  tribes  had  twelve  trittyes,  so  that  he  would  not 
have  achieved  his  object  of  redistributing  the  population  in 

4  fresh  combinations.     Further,  he  divided  the  country  into 
thirty  groups  of  demes,1  ten  from  the  districts  about  the 
city,  ten  from  the  coast,  and  ten  from  the  interior.     These 
he  called  trittyes ;  and  he  assigned  three  of  them  by  lot  to 
each  tribe,  in  such  a  way  that  each  should  have  one  portion 
in   each  of  these  three  localities.  *  All   who   lived  in  any 
given  deme  he  declared  fellow-demesmen,  to  the  end  that 
the  new  citizens  might  not  be  exposed  by  the  habitual  use 
of  family  names,  but  that  men  might  be  officially  described 
by  the  names  of  their  demes  ; 2  and  accordingly  it  is  by  the 
names  of  their  demes  that  the  Athenians  speak  of  one  another. 

5  He  also  instituted  Demarchs,  who  had  the  same  duties  as 
the  previously  existing  Naucrari, — the  demes  being  made 
to  take  the  place  of  the  naucraries.     He  gave  names  to  the 
demes,  some  from  the  localities  to   which   they   belonged, 
some  from  the  persons  who  founded  them,  since  some  of  the 
areas  no  longer  corresponded  to  localities  possessing  names. 

6  On  the  other  hand  he  allowed  every  one  to  retain  his  family 
and  clan  and  religious  rites  according  to  ancestral  custom. 
The  names  given   to  the  tribes  were   the  ten    which    the 
Pythia   appointed    out    of  the    hundred   selected    national 
heroes. 

22      By   these   reforms  the  constitution  became  much   more 

1  The  total  number  of  denies,  or  parishes,  is  not  given,  but  from 
Herodotus  it  appears  to  have  been  a  hundred.  It  gradually  increased 
with  the  growth  of  population,  and  in  the  third  century  B.C.  there  were 
1 76  demes.  The  demes  composing  each  trittys  appear  to  have  been  con 
tiguous,  but  each  trittys  was  separate  from  its  two  fellows,  so  that  the 
party  feeling  of  the  tribe  was  spread  over  three  local  divisions,  and  the 
old  feuds  between  the  different  districts  of  Attica  became  impossible. 

'*'  If  the  people  continued  to  speak  of  one  another  by  their  family 
names  as  hitherto,  newly  enfranchised  citizens,  whose  fathers  had  been 
slaves  or  aliens,  would  be  markedly  distinguished  from  the  older 
citizens  who  belonged  to  ancient  families  ;  but  by  making  the  name  of 
the  deme  part  of  the  necessary  description  of  every  citizen  he  broke 
down  the  family  tradition  ;  moreover,  it  was  easy  for  any  man  to 
establish  his  claim  to  citizenship  by  naming  the  deme  to  which  he 
belonged,  e\  en  though  his  father's  name  might  be  foreign  or  unfamiliar. 

CHAPTER   22 

democratic  than  that  of  Solon.     The  laws  of  Solon  had 
been  obliterated  by  disuse  during  the  period  of  the  tyranny, 
while  Cleisthenes  substituted  new  ones  with  the  object  of 
securing  the  goodwill  of  the  masses.     Among  these  was  the 
law  concerning  ostracism.     Four  years  l  after  the  establish-  2 
ment  of  this  system,  in  the  archonship  of  Hermocreon,  they 
first  imposed  upon  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  the  oath 
which  they  take  to  the  present  day.     Next  they  began  to 
elect  the  generals  by  tribes,  one  from  each  tribe,  while  the 
Polemarch  was  the  commander  of  the  whole  army.     Then.  . 
eleven  years   later,  in  the  archonship  of  Phaenippus  they 
won    the    battle  of  Marathon;    and    two  years   after  this 
victory,  when  the  people  had  now  gained  self-confidence, 
they  for  the  first  time  made  use  of  the  law  of  ostracism. 
This  had  originally  been  passed  as  a  precaution  against  men  in 
high  office,  because  Pisistratus  took  advantage  of  his  position 
as  a  popular  leader  and  general  to  make  himself  tyrant ;  and  4 
the  first  person  ostracized  was  one  of  his  relatives,  Hipparchus 
son  of  Charmus,  of  the  deme  of  Collytus,  the  very  person 
on  whose  account  especially  Cleisthenes  had  enacted  the  law, 
as  he  wished  to  get  rid  of  him.     Hitherto,  however,  he  had 
escaped ;  for  the  Athenians,  with  the  usual  leniency  of  the 
democracy,  allowed  all  the  partisans  of  the  tyrants,  who  had 
not  joined  in  their  evil  deeds  in  the  time  of  the  troubles,  to 
remain  in  the  city ;  and  the  chief  and  leader  of  these  was 
Hipparchus.     Then  in  the  very  next  year,  in  the  archonship  5 
of  Telesinus,2  they  for  the  first  time  since  the  tyranny  elected, 

This,  if  correct,  would  place  this  event  in  504  B.  c.  But,  in  the 
first  place,  that  year  belongs  to  another  Archon  ;  and  secondly,  it  is 
inconsistent  with  the  statement  below,  that  the  battle  of  Marathon 
occurred  eleven  years  later.  Marathon  was  fought  in  490  B.C.,  there 
fore  the  archonship  of  Hermocreon  should  be  assigned  to  501  B.C. 
for  which  year  no  name  occurs  in  the  extant  lists  of  Archons.  Whether 
the  mistake  in  the  present  passage  is  due  to  the  author  or  a  copyist  it 
is  impossible  to  say. 

2  487  B-c.  The  date  here  given  is  valuable,  because  it  had  hitherto 
been  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  Callimachus,  the  polemarch  at  Mara 
thon,  on  whose  casting  vote  the  lighting  of  that  battle  depended,  was 
elected  by  lot  or  by  open  vote.  The  words  of  Herodotus  (vi.  109)  strictly 
interpreted,  imply  the  former;  but  it  is  repugnant  to  common  sense  to 
suppose  that  an  officer  holding  so  important  a  position  was  elected  by 
lot,  and  it  is  now  clear  that,  until  three  years  after  Marathon  the  Ar 
chons  were  still  elected  by  direct  vote,  and,  as  stated  above  in  this 

ATHKNIKNSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

tribe  by  tribe,  the  nine  Archons  by  lot  out  of  the  five 
hundred1  candidates  selected  by  the  demes,  all  the  earlier 
ones  having  been  elected  by  vote;2  and  in  the  same  year 
Megacles  son  of  Hippocrates,  of  the  deme  of  Alopece,  was 

6  ostracized.     Thus  for  three  years  they  continued  to  ostracize 
the  friends  of  the  tyrants,  on  whose  account  the  law  had 
been   passed;    but  in  the   following   year  they  began    to 
remove  others  as  well,  including  any  one  who  seemed  to  be 
more    powerful    than    was   expedient.      The    first    person 
unconnected   with    the   tyrants    who    was    ostracized    was 

7  Xanthippus   son   of   Ariphron.     Two   years    later,   in    the 
archonship   of  Nicodemus,3  the  mines  of   Maroneia   were 
discovered,  and  the  state  made  a  profit  of  a  hundred  talents 
from    the   working   of  them.     Some  persons   advised    the 
people  to  make  a  distribution  of  the  money  among  them 
selves,  but  this  was  prevented  by  Themistocles.     He  refused 
to  say  on  what  he  proposed  to  spend  the  money,  but  he 
bade  them  lend  it  to  the  hundred  richest  men  in  Athens, 
one  talent  to  each,  and  then,  if  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
employed  pleased  the  people,  the  expenditure  should  be 
charged  to  the  state,  but  otherwise  the  state  should  receive 
the  sum  back  from  those  to  whom  it  was  lent.     On  these 
terms  he  received  the  money  and  with  it  he  had  a  hundred 
triremes  built,  each  of  the  hundred  individuals  building  one  ; 
and  it  was  with  these  ships  that  they  fought  the  battle  of 
Salamis  against  the  barbarians.     About  this  time  Aristides 

8  the  son  of  Lysimachus  was  ostracized.     Three  years  later, 
however,    in    the    archonship    of    Hypsichides,4     all     the 

same  chapter,  the  polemarch  was  the  chief  of  the  army,  the  ten 
generals  (who  subsequently  became  the  chief  military  commanders) 
being  his  subordinates. 

1  It  is  probable  that  there  is  a  mistake  m  this  number.     It  appears 
from  ch.  £  I  that  under  the  Solonian  constitution  the  number  of  candi 
dates  nominated  by  each  tribe  was  ten,  and  that  the  same  was 
number  in   the   writer's   own  day;    and  it. is  hardly  likely,  that  the 
higher  number  of  fifty  ever  prevailed  at  an  intermediate  period. 
Greek  numerals  for  loo  and  500  are  easily  confused.  ,-ttnf 

«  This  statement  can  only  apply  to  the  period  after  the  expulsion  of 
the  tyrants  and  the  reforms  of  Cleisthenes,  since  under  the  Soloman 
constitution  (ch.  8,  i)  the  Archons  were  elected  by  lot  out  of  forty  candi- 
dates  selected  by  the  tribes. 

3  483  B.  c.  4  481  B.  C.     The  name  of  this  Archon  is  new. 

CHAPTER   22 

ostracized  persons  were  recalled,  on  account  of  the  advance 
of  the  army  of  Xerxes  ;  and  it  was  laid  down  for  the  future 
that  persons  under  sentence  of  ostracism  must  live  between 
Geraestus  and  Scyllaeum,1  on  pain  of  losing  their  civic  rights 
irrevocably. 

So  far,  then,  had  the  city  progressed  by  this  time,  growing  23 
gradually  with  the  growth  of  the  democracy  ;  but- after  the 
Persian  wars  the  Council  of  Areopagus  once  more  developed 
strength  and  assumed  the  control  of  the  state.  It  did  not 
acquire  this  supremacy  by  virtue  of  any  formal  decree,  but 
because  it  had  been  the  cause  of  the  battle  of  Salamis  being 
fought.  When  the  generals  were  utterly  at  a  loss  how  to 
meet  the  crisis  and  made  proclamation  that  every  one 
should  sec  to  his  own  safety,  the  Areopagus  provided  a 
donation  of  money,  distributing  eight  drachmas  to  each 
member  of  the  ships'  crews,  and  so  prevailed  on  them  to  go 
on  board.  On  these  grounds  people  bowed  to  its  prestige  ;  2 
and  during  this  period  Athens  was  well  administered.  At  this 
time  they  devoted  themselves  to  the  prosecution  of  the  war 
and  were  in  high  repute  among  the  Greeks,  so  that  the  com 
mand  by  sea  was  conferred  upon  them,  in  spite  of  the 
opposition  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  The  leaders  of  the  3 
people  during  this  period  were  Aristides,  son  of  Lysimachus, 
and  Themistocles,  son  of  Neocles,  of  whom  the  latter 
appeared  to  devote  himself  to  the  conduct  of  war,  while  the 
former  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  clever  statesman  and 
the  most  upright  man  of  his  time.  Accordingly  the  one 
was  usually  employed  as  general,  the  other  as  political 
adviser.  The  rebuilding  of  the  fortifications  they  conducted  4 
in  combination,  although  they  were  political  opponents  ;  but 
it  was  Aristides  who,  seizing  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the 
discredit  brought  upon  the  Lacedaemonians  by  Pausanias, 
guided  the  public  policy  in  the  matter  of  the  defection 

1  So  the  MS.,  but  one  of  the  grammarians,  who  probably  drew  from 
this  passage,  says  that  ostracized  persons  were  compelled  to  live  outside 
these  boundaries  ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the  MS.  reading  here  should 
be  altered  by  the  insertion  of  /*?;  or  the  substitution  of  «KTOS  for  eWos. 
Certainly  in  later  times  we  find  ostracized  persons  living  beyond  these 
limits  ;  and  the  balance  of  probability  perhaps  leans  this  way.  Geraestus 
is  at  the  extreme  south  of  Euboea,  and  Scyllaeum  at  the  extreme  east 
of  Argolis. 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

5  of  the  Ionian  states  from1  the  alliance  with  Sparta.  It 
follows  that  it  was  he  who  made  the  first  assessment  of 
tribute  from  the  various  allied  states,  two  years  after  the 
battle  of  Salamis,  in  the  archonship  of  Timosthenes  ;2  and 
it  was  he  who  took  the  oath  of  offensive  and  defensive 
alliance  with  the  lonians,  on  which  occasion  they  cast  the 
masses  of  iron  into  the  sea.3 

24  After  this,  seeing  the  state  growing  in  confidence  and 
much  wealth  accumulated,  he  advised  the  people  to  lay  hold 
of  the  leadership  of  the  league,  and  to  quit  the  country  dis 
tricts  and  settle  in  the  city.  He  pointed  out  to  them  that 
all  would  be  able  to  gain  a  living  there,  some  by  service  in 
the  army,  others  in  the  garrisons,  others  by  taking  a  part  in 
public  affairs ;  and  in  this  way  they  would  secure  the 

2  leadership.      This  advice  was  taken  ;  and  when  the  people 
had  assumed  the  supreme  control  they  proceeded  to  treat 
their  allies  in  a  more  imperious  fashion,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Chians.  Lesbians,  and  Samians.     These  they  main 
tained  to  protect  their  empire,  leaving  their  constitutions 
untouched,  and  allowing  them  to  retain  whatever  dominion 

3  they  then  possessed.     They  also  secured  an  ample  mainten 
ance  for  the  mass   of  the    population  in   the   way  which 
Aristides  had  pointed  out  to  them.     Out  of  the  proceeds  of 
the  tributes  and  the  taxes  and  the  contributions  of  the  allies 
more  than  twenty  thousand  persons  were  maintained.  There 
were  6,000  jurymen,   1,600   bowmen,   1,200   Knights,  500 
members  of  the   Council,    500   guards    of  the  dockyards, 
besides  fifty  guards  in  the  Acropolis.    There  were  some  700 
magistrates  at  home,  and  some  700 4  abroad.   Further,  when 
they  subsequently  went  to    war,   there   were    in  addition 
2,500  heavy-armed  troops,  twenty  guard-ships,"  and  other 

1  The  MS.  has  'and';   but  the  sense  of  the  passage  requires  the 
alteration,   since  there  is  no  indication  of  Athens  having  made  an 
alliance  with  Sparta  at  this  time. 

2  478  B.C. 

For  this  ceremony,  as  a  sign  of  a  determination  which  should  last 
until  the  metal  floated  to  the  top  of  the  sea,  cf.  Herodotus  (i.  165)  and 
Horace  (Epod.  xvi.  25,  26). 

4  The  number  seems  to  be  repeated  by  mistake  on  the  part  of  the 
copyist. 

5  The  normal  crew  of  a  trireme  was  200  men.     At  that  rate  these 

CHAPTER   24 

ships  which  collected  the  tributes,  with  crews  amounting 
to  2,000  men,  selected  by  lot ;  and  besides  these  there  were 
the  persons  maintained  at  the  Prytaneum,  and  orphans,  and 
gaolers,  since  all  these  were  supported  by  the  state. 

Such  was  the  way  in  which  the  people  earned  their  25 
livelihood.  The  supremacy  of  the  Areopagus  lasted  for 
about  seventeen  years  after  the  Persian  wars,  although 
gradually  declining.  But  as  the  strength  of  the  masses 
increased,  Ephialtes,  son  of  Sophonides,  a  man  with  a 
reputation  for  incorruptibility  and  public  virtue,  who  had 
become  the  leader  of  the  people,  made  an  attack  upon  that 
Council.  First  of  all  he  ruined  many  of  its  members  by  2 
bringing  actions  against  them  with  reference  to  their  ad 
ministration.  Then,  in  the  archonship  of  Conon,1  he 
stripped  the  Council  of  all  the  acquired  prerogatives  from 
which  it  derived  its  guardianship  of  the  constitution,  and 
assigned  some  of  them  to  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  and 
others  to  the  Assembly  and  the  law-courts.  In  this  3 
revolution  he  was  assisted  by  Themistocles,2  who  was 
himself  a  member  of  the  Areopagus,  but  was  expecting  to 
be  tried  before  it  on  a  charge  of  treasonable  dealings  with 
Persia.  This  made  him  anxious  that  it  should  be  over 
thrown,  and  accordingly  he  warned  Ephialtes  that  the 
Council  intended  to  arrest  him,  while  at  the  same  time  he 
informed  the  Areopagites  that  he  would  reveal  to  them 

twenty  guard-ships  represent  4,000  men,  and  the  2,000  men  mentioned 
in  the  next  clause  presumbly  represent  ten  ships. 

1  462  13.  c. 

"  This  is  one  of  the  most  striking  of  the  new  views  of  history  brought 
to  light  by  the  reappearance  of  Aristotle's  work.  The  current  opinion 
(based  mainly  on  Thucydides)  is  that  Themistocles  was  ostracized 
about  471  B.C.,  that  the  charge  of  complicity  with  Pausanias  in  his 
intrigues  with  Persia  was  brought  against  him  about  466  B.C.,  and 
that  he  reached  Persia  in  his  flight  about  465  B.  c.,  the  year  in  which 
Artaxerxes  succeeded  Xerxes.  It  now  appears  (if  the  evidence  of  this 
work  is  to  be  accepted)  that  he  was  in  Athens  in  462  B.C.,  and  his 
ostracism  cannot,  therefore,  be  placed  earlier  than  461  B.C.,  and  his 
flight  to  Persia  may  have  occurred  in  460  B.  c.  This  statement  is 
irreconcilable  with  the  narrative  of  Thucydides  (i.  137)  that  in  his 
flight  he  was  nearly  captured  by  the  Athenian  fleet  then  .engaged  in 
the  siege  of  Naxos,  which  is  generally  assigned  to  the  year  466  B.  C. ; 
and  most  critics  reject  it.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  Thucydides' 
system  of  chronology  for  this  period  was  not  the  only  one  current  in 
antiquity. 

ATHKNIKNSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

certain  persons  who  were  conspiring  to  subvert  the  con 
stitution.  He  then  conducted  the  representatives  delegated 
by  the  Council  to  the  residence  of  Ephialtes,  promising 
to  show  them  the  conspirators  who  assembled  there, 
and  proceeded  to  converse  with  them  in  an  earnest  manner. 
Ephialtes,  seeing  this,  was  seized  with  alarm  and  took 
4  refuge  in  suppliant  guise  at  the  altar.  Every  one  was 
astounded  at  the  occurrence,  and  presently,  when  the 
Council  of  Five  Hundred  met,  Ephialtes  and  Themistocles 
together  proceeded  to  denounce  the  Areopagus  to  them. 
This  they  repeated  in  similar  fashion  in  the  Assembly, 
until \  they  succeeded  in  depriving  it  of  its  power.  Not 
long  afterwards,  however,  Ephialtes  was  assassinated  by 
Aristodicus  of  Tanagra.  In  this  way  was  the  Council  of 
Areopagus  deprived  of  its  guardianship  of  the  state. 

26  After  this  revolution  the  administration  of  the  state 
became  more  and  more  lax,  in  consequence  of  the  eager 
rivalry  of  candidates  for  popular  favour.  During  this 
period  the  moderate  party,  as  it  happened,  had  no  real  chief, 
their  leader  being  Cimon  son  of  Miltiades,  who  was  a  com 
paratively  young  man  l,  and  had  been  late  in  entering  public 
life ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  general  populace  suffered 
great  losses  by  war.  The  soldiers  for  active  service  were 
selected  at  that  time  from  the  roll  of  citizens,  and  as  the 
generals  were  men  of  no  military  experience,  who  owed 
their  position  solely  to  their  family  standing,  it  continually 
happened  that  some  two  or  three  thousand  of  the  troops 
perished  on  an  expedition ;  and  in  this  way  the  best  men 
alike  of  the  lower  and  the  upper  classes  were  exhausted. 
2  Consequently  in  most  matters  of  administration  less  heed  was 
paid  to  the  laws  than  had  formerly  been  the  case.  No 
alteration,  however,  was  made  in  the  method  of  election  of 
the  nine  Archons,  except  that  five  years  after  the  death 
of  Ephialtes  it  was  decided  that  the  candidates  to  be  sub 
mitted  to  the  lot  for  that  office  might  be  selected  from 

1  This  is  inconsistent  with  the  received  chronology,  and  also  with 
the  words  which  immediately  follow  ;  hence  various  conjectures  (e.  g. 
vu6p6v,  '  sluggish ',  for  vwrtpov)  have  been  proposed,  none  wholly 
satisfactory. 

CHAPTER   26 

the  Zeugitae  as  well  as  from  the  higher  classes.1  The  first 
Archon  from  that  class  was  Mnesitheides.2  Up  to  this 
time  all  the  Archons  had  been  taken  from  the  Pentacosio- 
medimni  and  Knights,  while  the  Zeugitae  were  confined  to 
the  ordinary  magistracies,  save  where  an  evasion  of  the  law 
was  overlooked.  Four  years  later,  in  the  archonship  of  3 
Lysicrates,3  the  thirty  '  local  justices  ',4  as  they  were  called, 
were  re-established ;  and  two  years  afterwards,  in  the 
archonship  of  Antidotus,5  in  consequence  of  the  great  -4 
increase  in  the  number  of  citizens,  it  was  resolved,  on  the 
motion  of  Pericles,  that  no  one  should  be  admitted  to  the 
franchise  who  was  not  of  citizen  birth  by  both  parents. 

After  this  Pericles  came  forward  as  popular  leader,  27 
having  first  distinguished  himself  while  still  a  young 
man  by  prosecuting  Cimon  on  the  audit  of  his  official 
accounts  as  general.  Under  his  auspices  the  constitution 
became  still  more  democratic.  He  took  away  some  of  the 
privileges  of  the  Areopagus,  and,  above  all,  he  turned  the 
policy  of  the  state  in  the  direction  of  sea  power,  which 
caused  the  masses  to  acquire  confidence  in  themselves  and 
consequently  to  take  the  conduct  of  affairs  more  and  more 
into  their  own  hands.  Moreover,  forty-eight  years  after  the  2 
battle  of  Salamis,  in  the  archonship  of  Pythodorus,6  the 
Peloponnesian  war  broke  out,  during  which  the  populace 
was  shut  up  in  the  city  and  became  accustomed  to  gain  its 
livelihood  by  military  service,  and  so,  partly  voluntarily  and 
partly  involuntarily,  determined  to  assume  the  administration 
of  the  state  itself.  Pericles  was  also  the  first  to  institute  ?, 
pay  for  service  in  the  law-courts,  as  a  bid  for  popular  favour 
to  counterbalance  the  wealth  of  Cimon.  The  latter,  having 

1  It  is  evident  from  ch.  7,  4  that  the  eligibility  to  the  archonship  was 
never,  strictly   speaking,   extended   beyond   this,  though  in   practice 
members  of  the  lowest  order,  the  Thetes,  often  held  the  office. 

2  The  archonship  of  Mnesitheides  was  in  457  B.  c. ;  and  as  the  death 
of  Ephialtes  was  in  462  B.C.,  and  it  has  just  been  stated  that  the 
alteration  in  the  law  was   made  five   years   later,  it  follows    that   a 
Zeugites  was  elected  for  the  first  year  in  which  the  members  of  that 
order  were  eligible. 

3  453  B.C.  *  See  chapters  16,  5  and  53,  i.  5  451  B.C. 

6  432-i  B-  C. ;  and  as  the  war  broke  out  four  months  before  the  end 
of  Pythodorus'  year  of  office  (Thuc.  ii.  2),  the  actual  date  falls  in 
the  spring  of  431  B.  C. 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

private  possessions  on  a  regal  scale,  not  only  performed  the 
regular  public  services  magnificently,  but  also  maintained 
a  large  number  of  his  fellow-demesmen.  Any  member  of 
the  deme  of  Laciadae  could  go  every  day  to  Cimon's  house 
and  there  receive  a  reasonable  provision ;  while  his  estate 
was  guarded  by  no  fences,  so  that  any  one  who  liked  might 

4  help  himself  to  the  fruit  from  it.     Pericles'  private  property 
was  quite  unequal  to  this  magnificence  and  accordingly  he 
took  the  advice  of  Damonides  of  Oia  (who  was  commonly 
supposed  to  be  the  person  who  prompted  Pericles  in  most  of 
his  measures,  and   was  therefore  subsequently  ostracized), 
which  was  that,  as  he  was  beaten  in  the  matter  of  private 
possessions,  he  should  make  gifts  to  the  people  from  their 
own  property ;  and  accordingly  he  instituted  pay  for  the 
members  of  the  juries.     Some  critics  accuse  him  of  thereby 
causing  a  deterioration  in  the  character  of  the  juries,  since  it 
was  always  the  common  people  who  put  themselves  for 
ward  for  selection  as  jurors,  rather  than  the  men  of  better 

5  position.     Moreover,  bribery  came  into  existence  after  this, 
the  first  person  to  introduce  it  being  Anytus,  after  his  com 
mand  at  Pylos.1     He  was  prosecuted  by  certain  individuals 
on  account  of  his  loss  of  Pylos,  but  escaped  by  bribing  the 
jury. 

28  So  long,  however,  as  Pericles  was  leader  of  the  people, 
things  went  tolerably  well  with  the  state  ;  but  when  he  was 
dead  there  was  a  great  change  for  the  worse.  Then  for  the 
first  time  did  the  people  choose  a  leader  who  was  of  no 
reputation  among  men  of  good  standing,  whereas  up  to  this 
time  such  men  had  always  been  found  as  leaders  of  the 
3  democracy.  The  first  leader  of  the  people,'2  in  the  very 
beginning  of  things,  was  Solon,  and  the  second  was 

1  Pylos  was  recaptured  by  the  Spartans,  owing  to  the  neglect  of 
Anytus  to  relieve  it,  in  411  B.  C.     Anytus  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
moderate  aristocratic  party  (ch.   34,  3),  and  one  of  the  prosecutors 
of  Socrates. 

2  It  is  evident  that  this  designation  '  leader  of  the  people '  became 
a  sort  of  semi-official  title.     There  is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  there 
was  ever  a  regular  process  of  appointment  to  the  post  ;  but  there  was 
always    some    recognized    chief    of   the   democratic   party   to   whom 
the  name  was  given.     The  leader  of  the  aristocratic  party  does  not 
seem  to  have  had  any  equally  well  recognized  designation. 

CHAPTER  28 

Pisistratus,  both  of  them  men  of  birth  and  position.  After 
the  overthrow  of  the  tyrants  there  was  Cleisthenes, 
a  member  of  the  'house  of  the  Alcmeonidae ;  and  he  had 
no  rival  opposed  to  him  after  the  expulsion  of  the  party  of 
Isagoras.  After  this  Xanthippus  was  the  leader  of  the 
people,  and  Miltiades  of  the  upper  class.  Then  came 
Themistocles  and  Aristides,1  and  after  them  Ephialtes  as 
leader  of  the  people,  and  Cimon  son  of  Miltiades  of  the 
wealthier  class.  Pericles  followed  as  leader  of  the  people,  and 
Thucydides,  who  was  connected  by  marriage  with  Cimon,  of 
the  opposition.  After  the  death  of  Pericles,  Nicias,  who  sub-  3 
sequently  fell  in  Sicily,  appeared  as  leader  of  the  aristocracy, 
and  Cleon  son  of  Cleaenetus  of  the  people.  The  latter 
seems,  more  than  any  one  else,  to  have  been  the  cause 
of  the  corruption  of  the  democracy  by  his  wild  undertakings  ; 
and  he  was  the  first  to  use  unseemly  shouting  and  coarse 
abuse  on  the  Bema.-  and  to  harangue  the  people  with  his 
cloak  girt  up  short  about  him.  whereas  all  his  predecessors 
had  spoken  decently  and  in  order.  These  were  succeeded 
by  Theramenes  son  of  Hagnon  as  leader  of  the  one  party, 
and  the  lyre-maker  Cleophon  of  the  people.  It  was 
Cleophon  who  first  granted  the  two-obol  donation  for  the 
theatrical  performances,3  and  for  some  time  it  continued  to 
be  given ;  but  then  Calibrates  of  Paeania  ousted  him  by 
promising  to  add  a  third  obol  to  the  sum.  Both  of  these 
persons  were  subsequently  condemned  to  death  ;  for  the 
people,  even  if  they  are  deceived  for  a  time,  in  the  end 
generally  come  to  detest  those  who  have  beguiled  them  into 
any  unworthy  action.  After  Cleophon  the  popular  leader-  4 
ship  was  occupied  successively  by  the  men  who  chose  to  talk 
the  biggest  and  pander  the  most  to  the  tastes  of  the  majority, 
with  their  eyes  fixed  only  on  the  interests  of  the  moment. 

1  Themistocles   and    Aristides  were    both    of  them  leaders  of  the 
democracy,  as  is  stated  in  ch.  23,  3.      It  is  a  mistake  to  regard  Aristides 
as  an  aristocratic  leader. 

2  The  Bema  was  the  platform  or  tribune  from  which  orators  spoke  in 
the  Athenian  Assembly. 

s  Two  obols  was  the  price  of  a  seat  in  the  theatre  ;  and  after  the 
time  of  Cleophon  (the  date  had  hitherto  been  placed  earlier,  Plutarch 
appearing  to  assign  the  measure  to  Pericles)  the  necessary  sum  was 
provided,  for  all  citizens  who  chose  to  apply  for  it,  by  the  state. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

5  The  best  statesmen  at  Athens,  after  those  of  early  times, 
seem  to  have  been  Nicias,  Thucydides,  and  Theramenes. 
As  to  Nicias  and  Thucydides,  nearly  every  one  agrees  that 
they  were  not  merely  men  of  birth  and  character,  but  also 
statesmen,  and  that  they  ruled  the  state  with  paternal  care. 
On  the  merits  of  Theramenes  opinion  is  divided,  because  it 
so  happened  that  in  his  time  public  affairs  were  in  a  very 
stormy  state.  But  those  who  give  their  opinion  deliberately 
find  him,  not,  as  his  critics  falsely  assert,  overthrowing  every 
kind  of  constitution,  but  supporting  every  kind  so  long  as  it 
did  not  transgress  the  laws  ;  thus  showing  that  he  was  able, 
as  every  good  citizen  should  be,  to  live  under  any  form  of 
constitution,  while  he  refused  to  countenance  illegality  and 
was  its  constant  enemy. 

29  So  long  as  the  fortune  of  the  war  continued  even,  the 
Athenians  preserved  the  democracy  ;  but  after  the  disaster 
in  Sicily,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  had  gained  the  upper 
hand  through  their  alliance  with  the  king  of  Persia,  they 
were  compelled  to  abolish  the  democracy  and  establish  in 
its  place  the  constitution  of  the  Four  Hundred-  The  speech 
recommending  this  course  before  the  vote  was  made  by 
Melobius,  and  the  motion  was  proposed  by  Pythodorus  of 
Anaphlystus ;  but  the  real  argument  which  persuaded  the 
majority  was  the  belief  that  the  king  of  Persia  was 
more  likely  to  form  an  alliance  with  them  if  the  constitu 
tion  were  on  an  oligarchical  basis.  The  motion  of  Pytho- 
3  dorus  was  to  the  following  effect.  The  popular  Assembly 
was  to  elect  twenty  persons,  over  forty  years  of  age, 
who,  in  conjunction  with  the  existing  ten  members  of  the 
Committee  of  Public  Safety,1  after  taking  an  oath  that  they 
would  frame  such  measures  as  they  thought  best  for  the 
state,  should  then  prepare  proposals  for  the  public  safety.  In 
addition,  any  other  person  might  make  proposals,  so  that 
of  all  the  schemes  before  them  the  people  might  choose  the 
3  best.  Cleitophon  concurred  with  the  motion  of  Pythodorus, 
but  moved  that  the  committee  should  also  investigate  the 

1  This  committee  is  probably  the  same  as  that  which  we  know  from 
Thucydides  to  have  been  appointed  immediately  after  the  news  of  the 
Sicilian  disaster  was  received  in  Athens. 

CHAPTER    29 

ancient  laws  enacted  by  CJeisthcnes  when  he  created  the 
democracy,  in  order  that  they  might  have  these  too  before 
them  and  so  be  in  a  position  to  decide  wisely ;  his  sugges 
tion  being  that  the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes  was  not  really 
democratic,  but  closely  akin  to  that  of  Solon.      When  the  4 
committee  was   elected,  their  first  proposal  was  that  the 
Prytanes  l  should  be  compelled  to  put  to  the  vote  any  motion 
that  was  offered  on  behalf  of  the  public  safety.     Next  they 
abolished  all  indictments  for  illegal  proposals,  all  impeach 
ments  and  public  prosecutions,  in  order  that  every  Athenian 
should  be  free  to  give  his  counsel  on  the  situation,  if  he 
chose ;  and  they  decreed  that  if  any  person  imposed  a  fine 
on  any  other  for  his  acts  in  this  respect,  or  prosecuted  him 
or  summoned  him  before  the  courts,  he  should,  on  an  informa 
tion   being  laid   against   him,  be  summarily  arrested  and 
brought  before  the  generals,  who  should  deliver  him  to  the 
Eleven2    to    be    put   to    death.     After   these    preliminary  5 
measures,  they  drew  up  the  constitution  in  the  following 
manner.     The  revenues  of  the  state  were  not  to  be  spent  on 
any  purpose  except  the  war.     All  magistrates  should  serve 
without  remuneration  for  the  period  of  the  war,  except  the 
nine  Archons  and  the  Prytanes  for  the  time   being,    who 
should  each  receive  three  obols  a  day.     The  whole  of  the 
rest  of  the  administration  was  to  be  committed,  for   the 
period  of  the  war,  to  those  Athenians  who  were  most  cap 
able  of  serving  the  state  personally  or  pecuniarily,  to  the 
number  of  not  less  than  five  thousand.     This  body  was  to 
have  full  powers,  to  the  extent  even  of  making  treaties  with 
whomsoever  they  willed  ;  and  ten  representatives,  overforty 
years  of  age,  were  to  be  elected  from  each  tribe  to  draw  up 
the  list  of  the  Five  Thousand,  after  taking  an  oath  on  a  full 
and  perfect  sacrifice. 

These  were  the  recommendations  of  the  committee;  and  30 
when  they  had  been  ratified  the  Five   Thousand  3  elected 

1  See  ch.  43,  4.  *  See  ch.  52,  i. 

This  mention  of  the  Five  Thousand  appears  to  be  in  dirert  con- 

tradiction  to  the  statement  in  ch.  32,3,  that  the  Five  Thousand  were  only 

nominally  selected,  which  is  also  in  accordance  with  the  statement  of 

hucydides  (vin.  93).     There  are  two  possible  explanations  :  either  all 

D  2 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RKSPUBLICA 

from  their  own  number  a  hundred  commissioners  to  draw 
up  the  constitution.  They,  on  their  appointment,  drew  up 

a  and  produced  the  following  recommendations.  There  should 
be  a  Council,  holding  office  for  a  year,  consisting  of  men 
over  thirty  years  of  age,  serving  without  pay.  To  this 
body  should  belong  the  Generals,  the  nine  Archons,  the 
Amphictyonic  Registrar  [Hieromnemon],1  the  Taxiarchs. 
the  Hipparchs,  the  Phylarchs,2  the  commanders  of  garrisons, 
the  Treasurers  of  Athena  and  the  other  gods,  ten  in  number, 
the  Hellenic  Treasurers  [Hellenotamiae], 3  the  Treasurers 
of  the  other  non-sacred  moneys,  to  the  number  of  twenty. 
the  ten  Commissioners  of  Sacrifices  [Hieropoei],  and  the  ten 
Superintendents  of  the  mysteries.  All  these  were  to  be 
appointed  by  the  Council  from  a  larger  number  of  selected 
candidates,  chosen  from  its  members  for  the  time  being. 
The  other  offices  were  all  to  be  filled  by  lot,  and  not  from 
the  members  of  the  Council.  The  Hellenic  Treasurers  who 
actually  administered  the  funds  should  not  sit  with  the 

3  Council.4  As  regards  the  future,  four  Councils  were  to 
be  created,  of  men  of  the  age  already  mentioned,  and  one 
of  these  was  to  be  chosen  by  lot  to  take  office  at  once,  while 
the  others  were  to  receive  it  in  turn,  in  the  order  decided  by 
the  lot.  For  this  purpose  the  hundred  commissioners  were 

persons  possessing  the  necessary  qualification  of  being  able  to  furnish 
arms  were  temporarily  called  the  Five  Thousand  until  the  list  of  that 
body  could  be  properly  drawn  up  (thus  the  so-called  Five  Thousand 
which  took  over  the  government  after  the  fall  of  the  Four  Hundred 
actually  included  all  persons  able  to  furnish  arms}  :  or  the  Five 
Thousand  nominated  by  the  hundred  persons  mentioned  at  the  end  of 
the  last  chapter  was  only  a  provisional  body,  and  a  fresh  nomination 
was  to  be  made  when  the  constitution  had  been  finally  drawn  up. 

1  This  is  the  title  of  one  of  the  two  members  sent  by  each  Amphic 
tyonic  state  to  the  general  councils.    He  served  as  secretary,  while  the 
other,  the  Pylagoras,  was  the  actual  representative  of  his  state. 

2  For  these  military  officers  see  ch.  61,  3-6. 

3  These  were  the  officers  appointed  to  receive  the  contribution  of  the 
allied  states  of  the  Confederacy  of  Delos,  or,  as  these  states  sub 
sequently  became,  the  subject-allies  of  the  Athenian  empire.    After  the 
loss  of  the  empire  by  the  result  of  the  Poloponnesian  war  these  officers 
were  no  longer  required,  and  consequently  ceased  to  exist. 

4  If  this  is  not  to  be  taken  as  directly  contradicting  the  statement 
made  just  above,  it  must  be  supposed  that  the  actual  handling  of  the 
money  was  confined  to  a  few   of  the   Helleuotamiae    (probably   in 
rotation),  the  duties  of  the  rest  being  to  advise  ancj  superintend. 

CHAPTP:R  30 

to  distribute  themselves  and  all  the  rest1  as  equally  as 
possible  into  four  parts,  and  cast  lots  for  precedence,  and 
the  selected  body  should  hold  office  for  a  year.  They2  were  4 
to  administer  that  office  as  seemed  to  them  best,  both  with 
reference  to  the  .safe  custody  and  due  expenditure  of  the 
finances,  and  generally  with  regard  to  all  other  matters  to  the 
best  of  theirability.  If  they  desired  to  take  a  larger  number 
of  persons  into  counsel,  each  member  might  call  in  one  assist 
ant  of  his  own  choice,  subject  to  the  same  qualification  of  age. 
The  Council  was  to  sit  once  every  five  days,  unless  there 
was  any  special  need  for  more  frequent  sittings.  The  casting 
of  the  lot  for  the  Council  was  to  be  held  by  the  nine  Archons  ; 
votes  on  divisions  were  to  be  counted  by  five  tellers  chosen 
by  lot  from  the  members  of  the  Council,  and  of  these  one 
was  to  be  selected  by  lot  every  day  to  act  as  president.  These  5 
five  persons  were  to  cast  lots  for  precedence  between  the 
parties  wishing  to  appear  before  the  Council,  giving  the  first 
place  to  sacred  matters,  the  second  to  heralds,  the  third 
to  embassies,  and  the  fourth  to  all  other  subjects  ;  but 
matters  concerning  the  war  might  be  dealt  with,  on  the 
motion  of  the  generals,  whenever  there  was  need,  without 
balloting.  Any  member  of  the  Council  who  did  not  enter  6 
the  Council-house  at  the  time  named  should  be  fined 
a  drachma  for  each  day,  unless  he  was  away  on  leave  of 
absence  from  the  Council. 

Such  was  the  constitution  which  they  drew  up  for  the  31 
time  to  come,  but  for  the  immediate  present  they  devised 
the  following  scheme.  There  should  be  a  Council  of  Four 
Hundred,  as  in  theancicnt  constitution,3  forty  from  each  tribe, 
chosen  out  of  candidates  of  more  than  thirty  years  of  age. 
selected  by  the  members  of  the  tribes.  This  Council  should 
appoint  the  magistrates  and  draw  up  the  form  of  oath  which 
they  were  to  take  ;  and  in  all  that  concerned  the  laws,  in  the 

1  i.e.,  apparently,  all  the  rest  of  the  Five  Thousand  who  were  over 
thirty  years  of  age. 

2  Mr.  J.  A.  R.  Munro  (Classical  Quarterly)  proposes  to  transfer  this 
sentence  and  the  next,  so  as  to  make  them  precede  the  two  previous 
sentences,  and  relate  to  the  Hellenic  Treasurers.      This  transposition 
would  make  the  sense  much  clearer. 

'  i.e.  as  in  the  constitution  of  Solon. 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RKSPUBLICA 

examination  of  official  accounts,  and  in  other  matters  gener- 
j  ally,  they  might  act  according  to  their  discretion.  They 
must,  however,  observe  the  la\vs  that  might  be  enacted  with 
reference  to  the  constitution  of  the  state,  and  had  no  power  to 
alter  them  nor  to  pass  others.  The  generals  should  be  provi 
sionally  elected  from  the  whole  body  of  the  Five  Thousand, 
but  so  soon  as  the  Council  came  into  existence  it  was  to  hold 
an  examination  of  military  equipments,  and  thereon  elect 
ten  persons,  together  with  a  secretary,  and  the  persons  thus 
elected  should  hold  office  during  the  coming  year  with  full 
powers,  and  should  have  the  right,  whenever  they  desired  it,  of 
3  joining  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Council.  The  Five  Thou 
sand1  was  also  to  elect  a  single  Hipparch  and  ten  Phylarchs; 
but  for  the  future  the  Council  was  to  elect  these  officers 
according  to  the  regulations  above  laid  down.  No  office, 
except  those  of  member  of  the  Council  and  of  general,  might 
be  held  more  than  once,  either  by  the  first  occupants  or  by 
their  successors.  With  reference  to  the  future  distribution2 
of  the  Four  Hundred  into  the  four  successive  sections,  the 
hundred  commissioners  must  divide  them  whenever  the  time 
comes  for  the  citizens  to  join  in  the  Council  along  with  the  rest. 

32  The  hundred  commissioners  appointed  by  the  Five 
Thousand  drew  up  the  constitution  as  just  stated  ;  and  after 
it  had  been  ratified  by  the  people,  under  the  presidency  of 
Aristomachus,  the  existing  Council,  that  of  the  year  of 
Callias.3  was  dissolved  before  it  had  completed  its  term  of 
office.  It  was  dissolved  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month 

1  The  subject  is  not  expressed  in  the  original,  but  as  it  is  stated  that 
in  the  future  the  Council  was  to  elect  these  officers,  it  seems  certain 
that  the  provisional  arrangement  was  that  the  Five  Thousand  should 
elect  them,  as  in   the  case   of  the  generals,  the   Council  not  being 
yet  properly  constituted. 

2  i.e.  the  distribution  mentioned  in  the  preceding   chapter.      Ap 
parently  the  sense  intended  is  that  the  division  into  the  four  sections 
should  take  place  so  soon  as  the  remaining  citizens  from  whom  the  four 
Councils  were  to 'be  drawn  up  (viz.  the  members  of  the  Five  Thousand 
over  thirty  years  of  age)  had  been  associated  with  the  Four  Hundred 
who  formed  the  provisional  Council,  i.  e.,  practically,  to  soon  as  the  list 
of  the  qualified  members  of  the  Five  Thousand  was  ready. 

3  Callias1  year  of  office  began  in  412  B.C.,  and  was  now  within  two 
months  of  its  end.      The  date  of  the  entry  of  the  Four  Hundred  into 
office  is  consequently  in  May,  411  B.  c. 

CHAPTER   32 

Thargelion,  and  the  Four  Hundred  entered  into  office  on 
the  twenty-first;  whereas  the  regular  Council,  elected  by 
lot,  ought  to  have  entered  into  office  on  the  fourteenth  of 
Scirophorion.1  Thus  was  the  oligarchy  established,  in  the  2 
archonship  of  Callias,  just  about  a  hundred  years  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  tyrants.  The  chief  promoters  of  the 
revolution  were  Pisander,  Antiphon,  and  Theramenes,  all  of 
them  men  of  good  birth  and  with  high  reputations  for 
ability  and  judgement.  When,  however,  this  constitution  3 
had  been  established,  the  Five  Thousand  were  only 
nominally  selected,  and  the  Four  Hundred,  together  with 
the  ten  officers  on  whom  full  powers  had  been  conferred,2 
occupied  the  Council-house  and  really  administered  the 
government  They  began  by  sending  ambassadors  to  the 
Lacedaemonians  proposing  a  cessation  of  the  war  on  the 
basis  of  the  existing  position ;  but  as  the  Lacedaemonians 
refused  to  listen  to  them  unless  they  would  also  abandon 
the  command  of  the  sea,  they  broke  off  the  negotiations. 

For  about  four  months  the  constitution  of  the  Four  33 
Hundred  lasted,  and  Mnasilochus  held  office  as  Archon  of 
their  nomination  for  two  months  of  the  year  of  Theopompus, 
who  was  Archon  for  the  remaining  ten.  On  the  loss  of  the 
naval  battle  of  Eretria,  however,  and  the  revolt  of  the  whole 
of  Euboea  except  Oreum,  the  indignation  of  the  people 
was  greater  than  at  any  of  the  earlier  disasters,  since  they 
drew  far  more  supplies  at  this  time  from  Euboea  than  from 
Attica  itself.  Accordingly  they  deposed  the  Four  Hundred 
and  committed  the  management  of  affairs  to  the  Five 
Thousand,  consisting  of  persons  possessing  a  military 
equipment.  At  the  same  time  they  voted  that  pay  should 
not  be  given  for  any  public  office.  The  persons  chiefly  a 
responsible  for  the  revolution  were  Aristocrates  and  Thera 
menes,  who  disapproved  of  the  action  of  the  Four  Hundred 
in  retaining  the  direction  of  affairs  entirely  in  their  o\\  n 
hands,  and  referring  nothing  to  the  Five  Thousand.  During 

1  Roughly  equivalent  to  June,  the  last  month  of  the  official  year 
at  Athens.  The  '  regular  Council '  means  the  Council  which,  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  things  under  the  democracy,  should  have  been 
elected  by  lot  to  succeed  that  belonging  to  the  year  of  Callias. 

~  I.  e.  the  ten  Generals  appointed  as  provided  for  in  ch.  31,  2. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

this  period  the  constitution  of  the  state  seems  to  have  been 
admirable,  since  it  was  a  time  of  war  and  the  franchise  was 
in  the  hands  of  those  who  possessed  a  military  equipment.1 

34  The  people,  however,  in  a  very  short  time  deprived  the 
Five  Thousand  of  their  monopoly  of  the  government.2 
Then,  six  years  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Four  Hundred,  in 
the  archonship  of  Callias  of  Angele,3  the  battle  of  Arginusae 
took  place,  of  which  the  results  were,  first,  that  the  ten 
generals  who  had  gained  the  victory  were  all 4  condemned 
by  a  single  decision,  owing  to  the  people  being  led  astray  by 
persons  who  aroused  their  indignation  ;  though,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  some  of  the  generals  had  actually  taken  no  part  in 
the  battle,  and  others  were  themselves  picked  up  by  other 
vessels.5  Secondly,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  proposed  to 
evacuate  Decelea  and  make  peace  on  the  basis  of  the  existing 
position,  although  some  of  the  Athenians  supported  this 
proposal,  the  majority  refused  to  listen  to  them.  In  this 
they  were  led  astray  by  Cleophon,  who  appeared  in  the 
Assembly  drunk  and  wearing  his  breastplate,0  and  prevented 
peace  being  made,  declaring  that  he  would  never  accept 
peace  unless  the  Lacedaemonians  abandoned  their  claims 
2  on  all  the  cities  allied  with  them.7  They  mismanaged  their 

1  This  is  an  echo  of  the  commendation  which  Thucydides  expresses 
at  greater  length  (viii.  97). 

2  Probably  after  the  battle  of  Cyzicus,  in  410  B.C.,  when   the  fleet, 
which  was  democratic  in  its  sympathies,  returned  to  Athens. 

3  406  B.  C.     This  was,  however,  five  years  after  the  overthrow  of  the 
oligarchy,  not  six,  so  that  either  Aristotle  calculated  from  the  beginning 
and  not  the  end  of  the  rule  of  the  Four  Hundred,  or  the  numeral  must 
be  altered  in  the  MS. 

4  This  is  probably  inexact.     Two  of  the  generals,  Conon  and  Leon, 
can   hardly    have   been   included   in    the   accusation,   as   Conon  was 
blockaded   in   Mytilene  and  Leon  is  never   mentioned  in  connexion 
with  either  the  battle  or  the  trial.      It  is  true  that  Aristotle  says  below 
that  some  of  the  condemned  generals  had  not  taken  part  in  the  battle, 
but   if    this   had    actually   been    the   case,    Xenophon    could    hardly 
have  helped  noticing  it.      Xenophon  does  expressly  name  the  eight 
generals  who  were  present  at  the  battle,  and  states  their  positions 
in  the  Athenian  line  ;    and,  of  these  eight,  six  stood  their  trial  and 
were  executed,  while  the  remaining  two  declined  to  return  to  Athens 
and  were,  no  doubt,  condemned  in  absence. 

6  And  therefore  were  in  no  condition  to  be  picking  up  the  survivors 
on  other  disabled  ships,  for  neglecting  which  they  were  condemned. 

6  As  a  warlike  demonstration,  like  a  politician  appearing  in  khaki. 

7  Cleophon  retorted  against  the  Lacedaemonians   the  ground  on 
which  they  had  refused  to  accept  the  Athenian  overtures  in  411  )'..  c. 

CHAPTER    34 

opportunity  then,  and  in  a  very  short  time  they  learnt  their 
mistake.  The  next  year,  in  the  archonship  of  Alexias, 
they  suffered  the  disaster  of  Aegospotami,  the  consequence 
of  which  was  that  Lysander  became  master  of  the  city,  and 
set  up  the  Thirty  as  its  governors.  He  did  so  in  the 
following  manner.  One  of  the  terms  of  peace  stipulated  3 
that  the  state  should  be  governed  according  to  '  the  ancient 
constitution '.  Accordingly  the  popular  party  tried  to 
preserve  the  democracy,  while  that  part  of  the  upper  class 
which  belonged  to  the  political  clubs,1  together  with  the 
exiles  who  had  returned  since  the  peace,  aimed  at  an 
oligarchy,  and  those  who  were  not  members  of  any  club, 
though  in  other  respects  they  considered  themselves  as  good 
as  any  other  citizens,  were  anxious  to  restore  the  ancient 
constitution.  The  latter  class  included  Archlnus,  Anytus, 
Cleitophon,  Phormisius,  and  many  others,  but  their  most 
prominent  leader  was  Theramenes.  Lysander,  however, 
threw  his  influence  on  the  side  of  the  oligarchical  party,  and 
the  popular  Assembly  was  compelled  by  sheer  intimidation 
to  pass  a  vote  establishing  the  oligarchy.  The  motion  to 
this  effect  was  proposed  by  Dracontides  of  Aphidna. 

In  this  way  were  the  Thirty  established  in  power,  in  the  35 
archonship  of  Pythodorus.2  As  soon,  however,  as  they 
were  masters  of  the  city,  they  ignored  all  the  resolutions 
which  had  been  passed  relating  to  the  organization  of  the 
constitution,3  but  after  appointing  a  Council  of  Five 
Hundred  and  the  other  magistrates  out  of  a  thousand 
selected  candidates,4  and  associating  with  themselves  ten 
Archons  in  Piraeus,  eleven  superintendents  of  the  prison,  and 
three  hundred  '  Jash-bearers  as  attendants,  with  the  help 
of  these  they  kept  the  city  under  their  own  control.  At  a 
first,  indeed,  they  behaved  with  moderation  towards  the 
citizens  and  pretended  to  administer  the  state  according  to 
the  ancient  constitution.  In  pursuance  of  this  policy  they 

1  i.e.  the  extreme  oligarchs.  2  The  year  404-403  B.C. 

3  The  Thirty  were  appointed  avowedly  to  draw  up  a  scheme  for  the 
constitution,  like  the  hundred  commissioners  mentioned  in  ch.  30. 

4  MS.  'out  of  candidates  selected  from  the  thousand  '  ;  but  nothing  is 
known  about  any  such  body.     The  other  magistrates  were  probably 
included  in  the  Council  (cf.  ch.  30,  2),  so  that  500  names  had  to  be 
chosen  from  1000. 

ATHENIENSIUM  RESPUBLICA 

took  down  from  the  hill  of  Areopagus  the  laws  of  Ephialtes 
and  Archestratus  relating  to  the  Areopagite  Council ;  they 
also  repealed  such  of  the  statutes  of  Solon  as  were  obscure,1 
and  abolished  the  supreme  power  of  the  law-courts.  In 
this  they  claimed  to  be  restoring  the  constitution  and 
freeing  it  from  obscurities  ;  as,  for  instance,  by  making  the 
testator  free  once  for  all  to  leave  his  property  as  he  pleased, 
and  abolishing  the  existing  limitations  in  cases  of  insanity, 
old  age,  and  undue  female  influence,  in  order  that  no 
opening  might  be  left  for  professional  accusers.2  In  other 

3  matters  also  their  conduct  was  similar.     At  first,  then,  they 
acted  on  these  lines,  and   they  destroyed  the  professional 
accusers  and  those   mischievous  and   evil-minded  persons 
who,  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  democracy,  had  attached 
themselves  to  it  in  order  to  curry  favour  with  it.     With  all 
of  this  the  city  was  much   pleased,   and   thought   that   the 

4  Thirty  were  doing  it  with  the  best  of  motives.     But  so  soon 
as  they  had  got  a  firmer  hold  on  the  city,  they  spared  no 
class  of  citizens,  but  put  to  death  any  persons  who  were 
eminent  for  wealth  or  birth  or  character.     Herein  they  aimed 
at  removing  all  whom  they  had  reason  to  fear,  while  they 
also  wished  to  lay  hands  on  their  possessions ;  and   in  a 
short  time  they  put  to  death  not  less  than  fifteen  hundred 
persons. 

36  Theramenes,  however,  seeing  the  city  thus  falling  into 
ruin,  was  displeased  with  their  proceedings,  and  counselled 
them  to  cease  such  unprincipled  conduct  and  let  the  better 
classes  have  a  share  in  the  government.  At  first  they  resisted 
his  advice,  but  when  his  proposals  came  to  be  known  abroad, 
and  the  masses  began  to  associate  themselves  with  him,  they 
were  seized  with  alarm  lest  he  should  make  himself  the 

1  See  ch.  9,  2. 

2  Solon's  law  allowed  a  man  who  had  no  legitimate  children  to 
leave  his  property  as  he   chose,  provided  his  will   was   made   while 
he  was  of  sound  mind  and  subject  to  no  undue  influence, 
provisions   were   reasonable   enough    in    themselves,   but   a    class   of 
hangers-on  of  the  law-courts  had  sprung  up,  who  made  a  profession  ot 
challenging  the  legality  of  testamentary  dispositions  on  these  grounds, 
no  doubt  in  the  hope  of  extorting  money.     In  order  to  put  an  end 
to  this  trade  the  Thirty  abolished  the  qualifications  in  the  law  ot  bo 
on  which  it  was  based. 

CHAPTER    36 

leader  of  the  people  and  destroy  their  despotic  power.  Ac 
cordingly  they  drew  up  a  list  of  three  thousand  1  citizens,  to 
whom  they  announced  that  they  would  give  a  share  in  the 
constitution.  Theramenes,  however,  criticized  this  scheme  * 
also,  first  on  the  ground  that,  while  proposing  to  give  all 
respectable  citizens  a  share  in  the  constitution,  they  were 
actually  giving  it  only  to  three  thousand  persons,  as  though 
all  merit  were  confined  within  that  number;  and  secondly 
because  they  were  doing  two  inconsistent  things,  since  they 
made  the  government  rest  on  the  basis  of  force,  and  yet 
made  the  governors  inferior  in  strength  to  the  governed. 
However,  they  took  no  notice  of  his  criticisms,  and  for  a 
long  time  put  off  the  publication  of  the  list  of  the  Three 
Thousand  and  kept  to  themselves  the  names  of  those  who 
had  been  placed  upon  it ;  and  every  time  they  did  decide  to 
publish  it  they  proceeded  to  strike  out  some  of  those  who 
had  been  included  in  it,  and  insert  others  who  had  been 
omitted. 

Now  when  winter  had  set  in,  Thrasybulus  and  the  exiles  37 
occupied  Phyle,  and  the  force  which  the  Thirty  led  out  to 
attack  them  met  with  a  reverse.  Thereupon  the  Thirty 
decided  to  disarm  the  bulk  of  the  population  and  to  get  rid 
of  Theramenes ;  which  they  did  in  the  following  way. 
They  introduced  two  laws  into  the  Council,  which  they 
commanded  it  to  pass  ;  the  first  of  them  gave  the  Thirty 
absolute  power  to  put  to  death  any  citizen  who  was  not 
included  in  the  list  of  the  Three  Thousand,  while  the  second 
disqualified  all  persons  from  participation  in  the  franchise 
who  should  have  assisted  in  the  demolition  of  the  fort  of 
Eetioncia,2  or  have  acted  in  any  way  against  the  Four 
Hundred  who  had  organized  the  previous  oligarchy. 
Theramenes  had  done  both,  and  accordingly,  when  these 

1  The  MS.  says  two  thousand,  but  this  must  be  a  copyist's  error, 
as  the  Three  Thousand  is  mentioned  immediately  below,  and  that  number 
is  confirmed  by  the  other  authorities. 

2  The  Four  Hundred  had  begun  to  build  this  fort,  which  commanded 
the  entrance  to  the  Piraeus,  in  the  later  days  of  their  rule  ;  but  Thera 
menes  and  others  of  the  moderate  party,  suspecting  that  it  was  intended 
to  enable  the  oligarchs  to  betray  the  port  to  the  Spartans,  incited  the 
populace  to  destroy  it.     This  was  one  of  the  most  serious  blows  dealt 
to  the  power  of  the  Four  Hundred. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

laws  were  ratified,  he  became  excluded  from  the  franchise  and 
3  the  Thirty  had  full  power  to  put  him  to  death.1  Theramenes 
having  been  thus  removed,  they  disarmed  all  the  people 
except  the  Three  Thousand,  and  in  every  respect  showed  a 
great  advance  in  cruelty  and  crime.  They  also  sent 
ambassadors  to  Lacedaemon  to  blacken  the  character  of 
Theramenes  and  to  ask  for  help  ;  and  the  Lacedaemonians, 
in  answer  to  their  appeal,  sent  Callibius  as  military  governor 
with  about  seven  hundred  troops,  who  came  and  occupied 
the  Acropolis. 

38  These  events  were  followed  by  the  occupation  of  Munichia 
by  the  exiles  from  Phyle,  and  their  victory  over  the  Thirty 
and  their  partisans.  After  the  fight  the  party  of  the  city 
retreated,  and  next  day  they  held  a  meeting  in  the  market 
place  and  deposed  the  Thirty,  and  elected  ten  citizens  with 
full  powers  to  bring  the  war  to  a  termination.  When,  how 
ever,  the  Ten  had  taken  over  the  government  they  did 
nothing  towards  the  object  for  which  they  were  elected,  but 
sent  envoys  to  Lacedaemon  to  ask  for  help  and  to  borrqw 

2  money.    Further,  finding  that  the  citizens  who  possessed  the 
franchise  were  displeased  at  their  proceedings,  they  were 
afraid  lest  they  should  be  deposed,  and  consequently,  in 
order  to  strike  terror  into  them  (in  which  design  they  suc 
ceeded),  they  arrested  Demaretus,  one  of  the  most  eminent 
citizens,  and  put  him  to  death.     This  gave  them  a  firm  hold 
on    the   government,    and    they   also   had    the    support  of 
Callibius  and  his  Peloponnesians,  together  with  several  of 
the  Knights ;  for  some  of  the  members  of  this  class  were 
the  most  zealous  among  the  citizens  to  prevent  the  return 

3  of  the  exiles  from   Phyle.     When,   however,  the  party  in 
Piraeus  and  Munichia  began  to  gain  the  upper  hand  in  the 
war,  through  the  defection  of  the  whole  populace  to  them, 
the  party  in  the  city  deposed  the  original  Ten,  and  elected 
another  Ten,*  consisting  of  men  of  the  highest  repute.  Under 

1  This    is    quite    different     from     Xenophon's     dramatic    account 
(ii.  3.  23-56;  ot  the  totally  illegal  arrest  and  execution  ot  Theramenes. 

'2  No  other  authority  seems  to  distinguish  between  these  two  boards 
of  Ten.     Practically,  the  rule  of  the  hrst  is  ignored,  and  only  that .c 
the  second,  which  brought  the  war  to  a  conclusion,  is  recognized;   t 
the  appointment  of  this  board  is  assigned  to  the  days  immediately 
following  the  defeat  of  the  Thirty,  and  it  is  not  recognized  that  a  con- 

CHAPTER   38 

their  administration,  and  with  their  active  and  zealous 
co-operation,  the  treaty  of  reconciliation  was  made  and  the 
populace  returned  to  the  city.  The  most  prominent 
members  of  this  board  were  Rhinon  of  Paeania  and  Phayllus 
of  Acherdus,  who,  even  before  the  arrival  of  Pausanias, 
opened  negotiations  with  the  party  in  Piraeus,  and  after 
his  arrival  seconded  his  efforts  to  bring  about  the  return  of 
the  exiles.  For  it  was  Pausanias,  the  king  of  the  Lacedae-  4 
monians,  who  brought  the  peace  and  reconciliation  to  a 
fulfilment,  in  conjunction  with  the  ten  l  commissioners  of 
arbitration  who  arrived  later  from  Lacedaemon,  at  his  own 
earnest  request.  Rhinon  and  his  colleagues  received  a  vote 
of  thanks  for  the  goodwill  shown  by  them  to  the  people, 
and  though  they  received  their  charge  under  an  oligarchy 
and  handed  in  their  accounts  under  a  democracy,  no  one. 
either  of  the  party  that  had  stayed  in  the  city  or  of  the  exiles 
that  had  returned  from  the  Piraeus,  brought  any  complaint 
against  them.  On  the  contrary,  Rhinon  was  immediately 
elected  general  on  account  of  his  conduct  in  this  office. 

This  reconciliation  was  effected  in  the  archonship  of  39 
Eucleides,2  on  the  following  terms.  All  persons  who,  having 
remained  in  the  city  during  the  troubles,  were  now  anxious 
to  leave  it,  were  to  be  free  to  settle  at  Eleusis,  retaining 
their  civil  rights  and  possessing  full  and  independent  powers 
of  self-government,  and  with  the  free  enjoyment  of  their  own 
personal  property.  The  temple  at  Eleusis  should  be  com-  2 
mon  ground  for  both  parties,  and  should  be  under  the 
superintendence  of  the  Ceryces  and  the  Eumolpidae,3  ac 
cording  to  primitive  custom.  The  settlers  at  Eleusis  should 
not  be  allowed  to  enter  Athens,  nor  the  people  of  Athens  to 
enter  Eleusis,  except  at  the  season  of  the  mysteries,  when 
both  parties  should  be  free  from  these  restrictions.  The 
secessionists  should  pay  their  share  to  the  fund  for  the 

siderable  time,  apparently  about  six  months,  elapsed  between  this  event 
and  the  restoration  of  the  democracy. 

1  Xenophon  says   fifteen,  and  some  editors  alter  the  present  text 
accordingly. 

2  i.  e.  late  in  the  summer  of  403  B.  c. 

3  Two  ancient  Athenian  families,  who  from  the  earliest  times  had 
retained  the  duty  of  superintending  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.     See 
ch.  57,  i. 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

common    defence  out  of  their  revenues,  just   like  all    the 

3  other  Athenians.     If  any  of  the  seceding  party  wished  to 
take    a   house   in    Eleusis,   the    people    would    help    them 
to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  owner ;  but  if  they  could  not 
come  to  terms,  they  should  appoint  three  valuers  on  either 
side,  and   the  owner  should   receive  whatever  price  they 
should  appoint.     Of  the  inhabitants  of  Eleusis,  those  whom 
the  secessionists  wished  to  remain  should  be  allowed  to  do 

4  so.  The  list  of  those  who  desired  to  secede  should  be  made 
up  within  ten  days  after  the  taking  of  the  oaths  in  the  case 
of  persons  already  in  the  country,  and  their  actual  departure 
should  take  place  within  twenty  days ;  persons  at  present 
out  of  the  country  should  have  the  same  terms  allowed  to 

5  them  after  their  return.     No    one  who   settled  at   Eleusis 
should  be  capable  of  holding  any  office  in  Athens  until  he 
should  again  register  himself  on  the  roll  as  a  resident  in  the 
city.     Trials  for  homicide,  including  all  cases  in  which  one 
party  had   either  killed    or    wounded   another,   should    be 

6  conducted  according  to  ancestral  practice.1    There  should  be 
a  general  amnesty  concerning  past  events  to\vards  all  persons 
except  the  Thirty,  the  Ten,  the  Eleven,  and  the  magistrates 
in  Piraeus;  and  these  too  should  be  included  if  they  should 
submit  their  accounts  in  the  usual    way.     Such   accounts 
should   be  given   by  the  magistrates  in  Piraeus  before  a 
court  of  citizens  rated  in  Piraeus,  and  by  the  magistrates  in 
the  city  before  a  court  of  those  rated  in  the  city.-    On  these 
terms   those  who   wished  to   do  so   might    secede.     Each 
party  was  to   repay  separately  the   money  which  it   had 
borrowed  for  the  war. 

40  When  the  reconciliation  had  taken  place  on  these  terms, 
those  who  had  fought  on  the  side  of  the  Thirty  felt  con 
siderable  apprehensions,  and  a  large  number  intended  to 
secede.  But  as  they  put  off  entering  their  names  till  the  last 
moment,  as  people  willdo,  Archinus,observing  theirnumbers, 
and  being  anxious  to  retain  them  as  citizens,  cut  off  the 
remaining  days  during  which  the  list  should  have  remained 

1  The  reading  of  this  passage  is  rather  doubtful 

2  The  exact  reading  of  this  passage  also  is  doubtful,  but  the  general 
sense  Appears  to  be  that  here  given  (inserting  i»  ro>  ao-rc.  after  «*  roit). 

CHAPTKR   40 

open  ;  and  in  this  way  many  persons  were  compelled 
to  remain,  though  they  did  so  very  unwillingly  until  they 
recovered  confidence.  This  is  one  point  in  which  Archinus  a 
appears  to  have  acted  in  a  most  statesmanlike  manner,  and 
another  was  his  subsequent  prosecution  of  Thrasybulus  on 
the  charge  of  illegality,  for  a  motion  by  which  he  proposed 
to  confer  the  franchise  on  all  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
return  from  Piraeus,  although  some  of  them  were  notoriously 
slaves.  And  yet  a  third  such  action  was  when  one  of  the 
returned  exiles  began  to  violate  the  amnesty,  whereupon 
Archinus  haled  him  to  the  Council  and  persuaded  them 
to  execute  him  without  trial,  telling  them  that  now  they 
would  have  to  show  whether  they  wished  to  preserve  the 
democracy  and  abide  by  the  oaths  they  had  taken  ;  for 
if  they  let  this  man  escape  they  would  encourage  others 
to  imitate  him,  while  if  they  executed  him  they  would  make 
an  example  for  all  to  learn  by.  And  this  was  exactly  what 
happened  ;  for  after  this  man  had  been  put  to  death  no 
one  ever  again  broke  the  amnesty.  On  the  contrary,  the  3 
Athenians  seem,  both  in  public  and  in  private,  to  have 
behaved  in  the  most  unprecedentedly  admirable  and  public- 
spirited  way  with  reference  to  the  preceding  troubles. 
Not  only  did  they  blot  out  all  memory  of  former  offences, 
but  they  even  repaid  to  the  Lacedaemonians  out  of  the 
public  purse  the  money  which  the  Thirty  had  borrowed  for 
the  war,  although  the  treaty  required  each  party,  the  party 
of  the  city  and  the  party  of  Piraeus,  to  pay  its  own  debts 
separately.  This  they  did  because  they  thought  it  was 
a  necessary  first  step  in  the  direction  of  restoring  harmony  ; 
but  in  other  states,  so  far  from  the  democratic  parties1 
making  advances  from  their  own  possessions,  they  are  rather 
in  the  habit  of  making  a  general  redistribution  of  the  land. 
A  final  reconciliation  was  made  with  the  secessionists  at  4 
Eleusis  two  years  after  the  secession,  in  the  archonship  of 
Xenaenetus.2 

This,  however,  took  place  at  a  later  date  ;  at  the  time  of  41 
which  we  are  speaking  the  people,  having  secured  the  control 

Or  '  victorious  democracies  '  (reading  of  8rjp.oi 

401   B.  C.     The  date  is  not  elsewhere  definitely  recorded. 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

of  the  state,  established  the  constitution  which  exists  at  the 

present  day.    Pythodorus  was  Archon  at  the  time,  but  the 

democracy  seems  to  have  assumed  the  supreme  power  with 

perfect  justice,  since  it  had  effected  its  own  return  by  its 

2  own  exertions.1     This  was  the  eleventh  change  which  had 

taken    place    in    the    constitution    of  Athens.     The    first 

modification  of  the  primaeval  condition  of  things  was  when 

Ion  and  his  companions  brought  the  people  together  into  a 

community,  for  then  the  people  was  first  divided  into  the 

four  tribes,  and  the  tribe-kings  were  created.     Next,  and 

first    after   this,    having    now    some   semblance  "of   a    con 

stitution,2  was  that  which  took  place  in  the  reign  of  Theseus, 

consisting  in  a  slight  deviation  from  absolute  monarchy. 

After  this  came  the  constitution  formed  under  Draco,  when 

the  first  code  of  laws  was  drawn  up.     The  third  was  that 

which  followed  the  civil  war,  in  the  time  of  Solon  ;   from 

this   the   democracy   took    its   rise.     The   fourth  was   the 

tyranny  of  Pisistratus  ;    the  fifth  the  constitution  of  Clei- 

sthenes,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  tyrants,  of  a  more  demo 

cratic  character  than  that  of  Solon.     The  sixth  was  that 

which   followed   on   the    Persian  wars,    when   the    Council 

of  Areopagus  had  the  direction  of  the  state.     The  seventh. 

succeeding  this,  was  the  constitution  which  Aristides  sketched 

out,  and  which  Ephialtes  brought  to  completion  by  over 

throwing  the  Areopagite  Council  ;   under  this  the  nation. 

misled  by  the  demagogues,  made  the  most  serious  mistakes 

in  the  interest  of  its  maritime  empire.     The  eighth  was  the 

establishment  of  the  Four  Hundred,  followed  by  the  ninth. 

the  restored  democracy.     The  tenth  was  the  tyranny  of  the 

Thirty  and  the  Ten.     The  eleventh  was  that  which  followed 

the  return  from  Phyle  and  Piraeus  ;  and  this  has  continued 

from  that  day  to  this,  with  continual  accretions  of  power  to 

the  masses.     The   democracy  has    made   itself  master  of 

1  The  text  here  is  corrupt.  There  is  no  natural  contrast  between 
the  fact  that  Pythodorus  was  Archon  and  the  assumption  of  the  control 
of  the  state  by  the  democracy,  since  the  Archon  had  for  a  long  time 
been  nothing  more  than  a  figure-head.  Probably  some  words  have 

ss  the  first  of  the  eleven  changes  to  which  Aristotle  has  just 
referred.  The  constitution  of  Ion  is  not  reckoned  in  the  enumeration. 
since  it  was  the  original  establishment  and  not  a  change. 

CHAPTER    41 

everything  and  administers  everything  by  its  votes  in  the 
Assembly  and  by  the  law-courts,  in  which  it  holds  the 
supreme  power.  Even  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Council  has 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  people  at  large ;  and  this 
appears  to  be  a  judicious  change,  since  small  bodies  are 
more  open  to  corruption,  whether  by  actual  money  or 
influence,  than  large  ones.  At  first  they  refused  to  allow  3 
pa\  ment  for  attendance  at  the  Assembly  ;  but  the  result 
was  that  people  did  not  attend.  Consequently,  after  the 
Prytanes  had  tried  many  devices  in  vain  in  order  to  induce 
the  populace  to  come  and  ratify  the  votes,  Agynhius,1  in 
the  first  instance,  made  a  provision  of  one  obol  a  day,  which 
Heracleides  of  Clazomenae,2  nicknamed  '  the  king ',  increased 
to  two  obols.  and  Agyrrhius  again  to  three. 

The  present  state  of  the  constitution  is  as  follows.  The  42 
franchise  is  open  to  all  who  are  of  citizen  birth  by  both 
parents.  They  are  enrolled  among  the  demesmen  at  the  age 
of  eighteen.  On  the  occasion  of  their  enrolment  the  demesmen 
give  their  votes  on  oath,  first  whether  the  candidates  appear 
to  be  of  the  age  prescribed  by  the  law  (if  not,  they  are 
'dismissed  back  into  the  ranks  of  the  boys),  and  secondly 
whether  the  candidate  is  free  born  and  of  such  parentage 
as  the  laws  require.3  Then  if  they  decide  that  he  is  not 
a  free  man,  he  appeals  to  the  law-courts,  and  the  demesmen 
appoint  five  of  their  own  number  to  act  as  accusers  ;  if  the 
court  decides  that  he  has  no  right  to  be  enrolled,  he  is  sold 
by  the  state  as  a  slave,  but  if  he  wins  his  case  he  has  a  right 
to  be  enrolled  among  the  demesmen  without' further  ques 
tion.  After  this  the  Council  examines  those  who  have  been  a 

1  A  politician  of  no  very  great  repute,  who  flourished  at  the  end 
of  the  fifth  century  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth.     It  is  clear 
from  many  allusions  in  the  Ecclesiazusae  of  Aristophanes  that  the  rate 
of  pay  had  been  raised  to  three  obols  shortly  before  the  performance  of 
that   play  in  392  B.  c.  ;   and  the  first  establishment  of  payment  for 
attendance  at  the  Assembly  cannot  be  placed  many  years  before  that 
date. 

2  Heracleides    is  only  known  otherwise  by  a  mention  in  the    Ion 
attributed  to  Plato,  in  which  he  is  referred  to  as  a  foreigner  who  had 
held  office  at  Athens. 

3  i.  e.  whether  he  is  born  of  two  citizen  parents. 

840.20  ]V 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPURLTCA 

enrolled,  and  if  it  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  any  of  them 
is  less  than  eighteen  years  of  age,  it  fines  the  demesmen 
who  enrolled  him.  When  the  youths  [Ephebi]  have  passed 
this  examination,  their  fathers  meet  by  their  tribes,  and 
appoint  on  oath  three  of  their  fellow  tribesmen,  over  forty 
years  of  age,  who,  in  their  opinion,  are  the  best  and  most 
suitable  persons  to  have  charge  of  the  youths  ;  and  of  these 
the  Assembly  elects  one  from  each  tribe  as  guardian, 
together  with  a  director,  chosen  from  the  general  body 

3  of  Athenians,  to  control  the  while.     Under  the  charge  of 
these  persons  the  youths  first  of  all  make  the  circuit  of  the 
temples  ;    then  they  proceed  to  Piraeus,  and  some  of  them 
garrison   Munichia  and  some  the  south  shore.1     The  As 
sembly  also  elects  two  trainers,  with  subordinate  instructors, 
who  teach  them  to  fight  in  heavy  armour,  to  use  the  bow 
and  javelin,  and  to  discharge  a  catapult.     The  guardians 
receive  from  the  state  a  drachma  apiece  for  their  keep,  and 
the  youths  four  obols  apiece.     Each  guardian  receives  the 
allowance  for  all  the  members  of  his  tribe  and  buys  the 
necessary   provisions   for   the    common   stock   (they   mess 
together  by  tribes),  and  generally  superintends  everything. 

4  In  this  way  they  spend  the  first  year.     The  next  year,  after 
giving  a  public  display  of  their  military  evolutions,  on  the 
occasion  when  the  Assembly  meets   in  the  theatre,-  they 
receive  a  shield  and  spear  from  the  state  ;    after  which  they 

5  patrol  the  country  and  spend  their  time  in  the  forts.    For 
these  two  years  they  are  on  garrison  duty,  and  wear  the 
military  cloak,  and  during  this  time  they  are  exempt  from 
all  taxes.     They  also  can  neither  bring  an  action  at  law, 
nor  have  one  brought  against    them,  in   order   that   they 
may  have  no  excuse  for  requiring  leave  of  absence  ;  though 
exception  is  made  in  cases  of  actions  concerning  inheritances 
and  wards  of  state,3  or  of  any  sacrificial  ceremony  connected 

J;  =  the  southern  side  of  Piraeus. 

2  This  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  great  Dionysiac  festival  in  each 
year,  when  the  whole  people  was  gathered  together  in  the  theatre, 
together  with  numbers  of  visitors  from  foreign  countries. 

»  When  a  man  died  leaving  a  daughter,  but  no  son,  his  estate, 
though  not  becoming  her  property,  was  attached  to  her,  and  the 
nearest  of  kin  could  claim  her  in  marriage  ;  and  the  property  went  to 
the  sons  born  of  such  marriage.  If  she  was  poor,  the  nearest  of  km 

CHAPTER   42 

with  the  family.1     When  the  two  years  have  elapsed  they 
thereupon  take  their  position    among   the   other  citizens. 
Such  is  the  manner  of  the  enrolment  of  the  citizens  and  the  43 
training  of  the  youths. 

All  the  magistrates  that  are  concerned  with  the  ordinary 
routine  of  administration  are  elected  by  lot,  except  the 
Military  Treasurer,  the  Commissioners  of  the  Theoric  fund,2 
and  the  Superintendent  of  Springs.3  These  are  elected  by 
vote,  and  hold  office  from  one  Panathcnaic  festival  to  the 
next.4  All  military  officers  are  also  elected  by  vote. 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  is  elected  by  lot,  fifty  from  a 
each  tribe.   Each  tribe  holds  the  office  of  Pry  tanes  in  turn,  the 
order  being  determined   by  lot;    the   first    four   serve   for 
thirty-six  days  each,  the  last  six  for  thirty-five,  since  the 
reckoning  is  by  lunar  years."'     The  Prytanes  for  the  time  3 
being,  in  the  first  place,  mess  together  in  the  Tholus,6  and 
receive  a  sum  of  money  from  the  state  for  their  maintenance  ; 
and,  secondly,  they  convene  the  meetings  of  the  Council 

was  obliged  either  to  marry  her  or  to  provide  her  with  a  dowry.  If 
there  were  more  daughters  than  one,  the  estate  seems  to  have  been 
divided  among  them  under  similar  conditions.  These  heiresses  were 
under  the  special  protection  of  the  Archon  (see  ch.  56,  6,  7),  and  may 
therefore  be  described  as  wards  of  state. 

1  Only  members  of  the  older  houses  belonged  to  'families'  in  the 
technical  sense,  these  being  one  of  the  earliest  subdivisions  of  the 
population  of  Attica,    and  having  sacrificial    observances   connected 
with  them.     See  ch.  21,  6,  where  it  is  said  that  Cleisthenes,  though 
breaking  up  the  old  tribal  organization  and  introducing  new  citizens, 
allowed  the  families  and  the  sacrificial  observances  to  remain  according 
to  the  ancient  system. 

2  This  was  the  fund  which  provided  the  populace  with  the  price  of 
admission  to  the  theatre  (and,  eventually,  with  something  in  addition) 
at  the  festivals. 

3  Athens  was  scantily  supplied  with  fresh  water,  and  consequently 
this  officer  was  of  some  importance. 

4  The  Panathenaic  festival  was  at  the  end  of  the  first  month  of  the 
Attic  year  (July).     The  other  magistrates  probably  came  into  office  at 
the  beginning  of  that  month  ;  the  Archons  certainly  did  so. 

5  The  ordinary  Attic  year  was  of  354  days,  divided  into  twelve  lunar 
months  of  thirty  and  twenty-nine  days  alternately.    The  deficiency  was 
made  up  by  inserting  intercalary  months,  at  first  every  alternate  year, 
then  three  in  eight  years,  and  subsequently  seven  in  nineteen.      In  an 
intercalary  year  the  duration  of  the  prytanies  was  thirty-nine  and 
thirty-eight  days,  in  place  of  thirty-six  and  thirty-five. 

6  The  official  residence  of  the  Prytanes.  supposed  to  represent  the 
centre  of  the  public  life  of  Athens. 

K  2 

ATHKNIKNSTUM    RKSPUBLICA 

and  the  Assembly.  The  Council  they  convene  every  day, 
unless  it  is  a  holiday,  the  Assembly  four  times  in  each 
prytany.  It  is  also  their  duty  to  draw  up  the  programme 
of  the  business  of  the  Council  and  to  decide  what  subjects 
are  to  be  dealt  with  on  each  particular  day,  and  where  the 

4  sitting  is  to  be  held.     They  also  draw  up  the  programme 
for  the  meetings  of  the  Assembly.     One  of  these  in  each 
prytany  is  called  the  '  sovereign '    Assembly ;  in  this  the 
people  have  to  ratify  the  continuance  of  the  magistrates  in 
office,    if  they  are   performing  their  duties  properly,  and 
to  consider  the  supply    of  corn    and   the  defence   of  the 
country.     On  this  day,  too,  impeachments  are  introduced 
by  those  who  wish  to  do  so,  the  lists  of  property  confiscated 
by  the  state  are  read,  and  also  applications  for  inheritances 
and  wards  of  state,1  so  that  nothing  may  pass  unclaimed 

5  without  the  cognizance  of  any  person  concerned.     In  the 
sixth  prytany,  in  addition  to  the  business  already  stated, 
the  question  is  put  to  the  vote  whether  it  is  desirable  to  hold 
a  vote  of  ostracism  or  not ;  and  complaints  against  profes 
sional  accusers,  whether  Athenian  or  aliens  domiciled  in 
Athens,  are  received,  to  the  number  of  not  more  than  three 
of  either  class,  together  with  cases  in  which  an  individual 
has  made  some  promise  to  the  people  and  has  not  performed 

6  it.     Another  Assembly  in  each  prytany  is  assigned  to  the 
hearing  of  petitions,  and  at  this  meeting  any  one  is  free, 
on  depositing  the  petitioner's  olive-branch,  to  speak  to  the 
people  concerning  any  matter,  public  or  private.     The  two 
remaining  meetings  are  devoted  to  all  other  subjects,  and 
the  laws  require  them  to  deal  with  three  questions  connected 
with  religion,  three  connected  with  heralds  and  embassies, 
and  three   on  secular  subjects.     Sometimes  questions  are 
brought  forward  without  a  preliminary  vote  of  the  Assembly 
to  take  them  into  consideration. 

Heralds  and  envoys  appear  first  before  the  Prytanes,  and 
the  bearers  of  dispatches  rJso  deliver  them  to  the  same 
officials. 

f  If  there  %vas]no  direct  heir,  the' next  of  kin  had  to  apply  to  the 
state,  in  the"person  of  the  Archon.  to'have  his.claim  recognized, 
claims  on  wards  of  state  have  been  mentioned  in  note  3  to  ch.  42.  5. 

CHAPTER    44 

There  is  a  single  President  of  the  Prytanes,  elected  by  lot,  44 
who  presides  for  a  night  and  a  day ;  he  may  not  hold  the 
office  for  more  than  that  time,  nor  may  the  same  individual 
hold  it  twice.  He  keeps  the  keys  of  the  sanctuaries  in 
which  the  treasures  and  public  records  of  the  state  are 
preserved,  and  also  the  public  seal ;  and  he  is  bound  to 
remain  in  the  Tholus,  together  with  one-third  of  the 
Prytanes,  named  by  himself.  Whenever  the  Prytanes  2 
convene  a  meeting  of  the  Council  or  Assembly,  he  appoints 
by  lot  nine  Proedri,  one  from  each  tribe  except  that  which 
holds  the  office  of  Prytanes  for  the  time  being ;  and  out  of 
these  nine  he  similarly  appoints  one  as  President,  and  hands 
over  the  programme  for  the  meeting  to  them.  They  take  3 
it  and  see  to  the  preservation  of  order,  put  forward  the 
various  subjects  which  are  to  be  considered,  decide  the 
results  of  the  votings,  and  direct  the  proceedings  generally.1 
They  also  have  power  to  dismiss  the  meeting.  No  one 
may  act  as  President  more  than  once  in  the  year,  but  he 
may  be  a  Proedrus  once  in  each  prytany. 

Elections  to  the  offices  of  General  and  Hipparch  and  all  4 
other  military  commands  are  held  in  the  Assembly,  in  such 
manner  as  the  people  decide  ;  they  are  held  after  the  sixth 
prytany  by  the  first  board  of  Prytanes  in  whose  term  of 
office  the  omens  are  favourable.  There  has,  however,  to  be 
a  preliminary  consideration  by  the  Council  in  this  case  also.2 

In  former  times  the  Council  had  full  powers  to  inflict  45 
fines  and  imprisonment  and  death  ;  but  3  when  it  had  con 
signed  Lysimachus4  to  the  executioner,  and  he  was  sitting 
in  the  immediate  expectation  of  death,  Eumelides  of  Alopece 
rescued  him  from  its  hands,5  maintaining  that  no  citizen 
ought  to  be  put  to  death  except  on  the  decision  of  a  court 

1  In  the  fifth  century  the  Prytanes  themselves  acted  as  presidents 
at  meetings  of  the  Council  and  Assembly  ;    but  in  the  fourth  century 
the  Proedri  appear  to  have  been  instituted,  as  here  described. 

2  As  with  all  business  submitted  to  the  Assembly :  see  ch.  45,  4. 

3  The  MS.  has  'and',  but  is  perhaps  imperfect. 

1  Neither  the  story  nor  the  person  is  otherwise  known.      He   may 
have  been  one  of  the  partisans  of  the  Thirty  (Xen.  Hell.  ii.  4,  8). 
Or  '  deprived  it  of  its  powers  '. 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RKSPUHLICA 

of  law.1  Accordingly  a  trial  was  held  in  a  law-court, 
and  Lysimachus  was  acquitted,  receiving  henceforth  the 
nickname  of  'the  man  from  the  drum-head';2  and  the 
people  deprived  the  Council  thenceforward  of  the  power 
to  inflict  death  or  imprisonment  or  fine,  passing  a  law 
that  if  the  Council  condemn  any  person  for  an  offence 
or  inflict  a  fine,  the  Thesmothetae  shall  bring  the  sentence 
or  fine  before  the  law-court,  and  the  decision  of  the  jurors 
shall  be  the  final  judgement  in  the  matter. 

2  The  Council  passes  judgement  on  nearly  all  magistrates, 
especially  those  who  have  the  control  of  money  ;  its  judge 
ment,  however,  is  not  final,  but  is  subject  to  an  appeal  to 
the  law-courts.  Private  individuals,  also,  may  lay  an 
information  against  any  magistrate  they  please  for  not 
obeying  the  laws,  but  here  too  there  is  an  appeal  to  the 

7,  law-courts  if  the  Council  declare  the  charge  proved.  The 
Council  also  examines  those  who  are  to  be  its  members  for 
the  ensuing  year,  and  likewise  the  nine  Archons.3  Formerly 
the  Council  had  full  power  to  reject  candidates  for  office  as 
unsuitable,  but  now  they  have  an  appeal  to  the  law-courts. 

•*  In  all  these  matters,  therefore,  the  Council  has  no  final 
jurisdiction.  It  takes,  however,  preliminary  cognizance  of 
all  matters  brought  before  the  Assembly,  and  the  Assembly 
cannot  vote  on  any  question  unless  it  has  first  been  con 
sidered  by  the  Council  and  placed  on  the  programme  by  the 
Prytanes ;  since  a  person  who  carries  a  motion  in  the 
Assembly  is  liable  to  an  action  for  illegal  proposal  on  these 
grounds.4 

46  The  Council  also  superintends  the  triremes  that  are 
already  in  existence,  with  their  tackle  and  sheds,6  and  builds 
new  triremes  or  quadriremes,6  whichever  the  Assembly 

1  It  should  be  observed  that  throughout  the  treatise  a  'law-court' 
(hiuuTTTipiov)   always   means   one    of  the    large    popular   jury-courts, 
the  constitutional  importance  of  which  is  described  in  ch.  9. 

2  This,  though  verbally  close  to  the  original,  is  rather  a  paraphrase 
than  a  translation.   The  original  apparently  denotes  that  Lysimachus  was 
about  to  be  executed  by  the  method  of  beating  or  bastinadoing  to  death. 

3  See  ch.  55,  2. 

4  i.  e.  if  this  procedure  has  been  omitted. 

s  i.  c.  the  sheds  in  which  the  ships  were  laid  up  when  in  dock. 

"  Quadriremes  were  first  built  at  Athens  a  few  years  before  350  B.  C., 

CHAPTER   46 

votes,  with  tackle  and  sheds  to  match.  The  Assembly 
appoints  master-builders  for  the  ships  by  vote  ;  and  if  they 
do  not  hand  them  over  completed  to  the  next  Council,  the 
old  Council  l  cannot  receive  the  customary  donation  —  that 
being  normally  given  to  it  during  its  successor's  term  of 
office.  For  the  building  of  the  triremes  it  appoints  ten 
commissioners,  chosen  from  its  own  members.  The  Council  2 
also  inspects  all  public  buildings,  and  if  rt  is  of  opinion  that 
the  state  is  being  defrauded,  it  reports  the  culprit  to  the 
Assembly,  and  on  condemnation2  hands  him  over  to  the  law- 
courts. 

The  Council  also  co-operates  with  the  other  magistrates  47 
in  most  of  their  duties.  First  there  are  the  treasurers  of 
Athena,3  ten  in  number,  elected  by  lot,  one  from  each  tribe. 
According  to  the  law  of  Solon  —  which  is  still  in  force  —  they 
must  be  Pentacosiomedimni,  but  in  point  of  fact  the  person 
on  whom  the  lot  falls  holds  the  office  even  though  he  be 
quite  a  poor  man.  These  officers  take  over  charge  of  the 
statue  of  Athena,  the  figures  of  Victory,  and  all  the  other 
ornaments  of  the  temple,  together  with  the  money,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Council.  Then  there  are  the  Commissioners  - 
for  Public  Contracts  [PoletaeJ,  ten  in  number,  one  chosen 
by  lot  from  each  tribe,  who  farm  out  the  public  contracts. 
They  lease  the  mines  and  taxes,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Military  Treasurer  and  the  Commissioners  of  the  Theoric 
fund,  in  the  presence  of  the  Council,  and  grant,  to  the 
persons  indicated  by  the  vote  of  the  Council,  the  mines 
which  are  let  out  by  the  state,  including  both  the  workable 

and  in  325  B.C.  they  began  to  build  quinqueremes.  As  the  latter  are 
not  mentioned  here,  we  seem  to  get  a  lower  limit  of  date  for  the  com 
position  (or  revision)  of  the  treatise.  The  upper  limit  is  fixed  by 
ch.  54,  7  as  329  B.C. 

1  Grammatically  the  subject  of  this  sentence  should  be  the  master- 
builders,  but  the  facts  are  stated  in  the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against 
Androtion  in  closely  parallel  language. 

2  According  to  the  text  of  the   MS.  (»carrtyi/oO(Tnj,  the  condemnation 
is  by  the  Council  ;    but  this  has  already  been   expressed  before  the 
reference  to  the  Assembly  (<i8iK€jf  8o£.v),  and  if  condemnation  by  the 
Council  sufficed  for  the  case    to  be   brought    before   the  courts,  the 
reference  to  the  Assembly  would  be  otiose.      Hence  the  emendation 

3  Each  of  the  temples  seems  to  have  possessed  a  treasury,  but  that 
of  the  temple  of  Athena  was  far  the  most  important. 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLTCA 

ones,  which  arc  let  for  three  years,  and  those  which  arc 
let  under  special  agreements  for  [ten?]  years.1  They 
also  sell,  in  the  presence  of  the  Council,  the  property 
of  those  who  have  gone  into  exile  from  the  court  of  the 
Areopagus,  and  of  others  whose  goods  have  been  confiscated, 
and  the  nine  Archons  ratify  the  contracts.  They  also 
hand  over  to  the  Council  lists  of  the  taxes  which  are  farmed 

3  out  for  the  year,  entering  on  whitened  tablets  the  name  of 
the  lessee  and    the   amount    paid.     They    make   separate 
lists,  first  of  those  who  have  to  pay  their  instalments  in  each 
prytany,  on  ten  several  tablets,  next  of  those  who  pay  thrice 
in  the  year,  with  a  separate  tablet  for  each  instalment,  and 
finally  of  those  who  pay  in  the  ninth  prytany.     They  also 
draw  up  a  list  of  farms  and  dwellings  which  have  been 
confiscated    and  sold  by  order    of   the    courts;    for    these 
too  come  within  their  province.     In  the  case  of  dwellings 
the  value  must  be  paid  up  in  five  years,  and  in  that  of  farms, 

4  in  ten.     The  instalments  are  paid   in   the  ninth   prytany. 
Further,  the   King-archon    brings  before  the  Council   the 
leases  of  the  sacred  enclosures  written  on  whitened  tablets. 
These  too  arc  leased  for  ten  years,  and  the  instalments  are 
paid    in    the    [ninth]   prytany ;    consequently   it   is  in  this 

5  prytany  that  the  greatest  amount  of  money   is   collected. 
The   tablets   containing   the    lists    of  the   instalments  are 
carried  into  the  Council,  and  the  public  clerk  takes  charge 
of  them.     Whenever  a   payment   of  instalments  is  to  be 
made  he  takes  from  the  pigeon-holes2  the  precise  list  of  the 
sums  which  are  to  be  paid  and  struck  off  on  that  day.  and 
delivers  it  to  the   Receivers-General.     The   rest   are  kept 
apart,  in  order  that  no  sum  may  be  struck  off  before  it  is  paid. 

4g  There  arc  ten  Receivers-General  [Apodectae],  elected  by- 
lot,  one  from  each  tribe.  These  officers  receive  the  tablets, 
and  strike  off  the  instalments  as  they  are  paid,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Council  in  the  Council-chamber,  and  give 
the  tablets  back  to  the  public  clerk.  If  any  one  fails  to  pay 

1  This  is  the  apparent  reading  of  the  passage,  but  the  MS.  is  con 
siderably  damaged  in  this  part. 

2  The  exact  meaning  of  the  word  here  (following  Sir.  J.  Sandys i  trans 
lated  '  pigeon-holes  '  is  doubtful. 

CHAPTER   48 

his  instalment,  a  note  is  made  of  it  on  the  tablet ;  and 
he  is  bound  to  pay  double  the  amount  of  the  deficiency,  or, 
in  default,  to  be  imprisoned.  The  Council  has  full  power 
by  the  laws  to  exact  these  payments  and  to  inflict  this 
imprisonment.  They  receive  all  the  instalments,  therefore,  on  2 
one  day,  and  portion  the  money  out  among  the  magistrates'; 
and  on  the  next  day  they  bring  up  the  report  of  the 
apportionment,  written  on  a  wooden  notice-board,  and  read 
it  out  in  the  Council-chamber,  after  which  they  ask  publicly 
in  the  Council  whether  any  one  knows  of  any  malpractice  in 
reference  to  the  apportionment,  on  the  part  of  either  a 
magistrate  or  a  private  individual,  and  if  any  one  is  charged 
with  malpractice  they  take  a  vote  on  it. 

The  Council  also  elects  ten  Auditors  [Logistae]  by  lot  3 
from  its  own  members,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  magis 
trates  for  each  prytany.  They  also  elect  one  Examiner  of  4 
Accounts  [Euthunus]  by  lot  from  each  tribe,  with  two 
assessors  [Pared ri]  for  each  examiner,  whose  duty  it  is  to 
sit  at  the  ordinary  market  hours,1  each  opposite  the 
statue  of  the  eponymous  hero  of  his  tribe  ;  and  if  any  one 
wishes  to  prefer  a  charge,  on  either  public  or  private 
grounds,  against  any  magistrate  who  has  passed  his  audit 
before  the  law-courts,  within  three  days  of  his  having  so 
passed,  he  enters  on  a  whitened  tablet  his  own  name  and  that 
of  the  magistrate  prosecuted,  together  with  the  malpractice 
that  is  alleged  against  him.  He  also  appends  his  claim  for 
a  penalty  of  such  amount  as  seems  to  him  fitting,  and  gives 
in  the  record  to  the  Examiner.  The  latter  takes  it,  and  if  5 
after  reading  it  he  considers  it  proved  he  hands  it  over,  if 
a  private  case,  to  the  local  justices  who  introduce  cases  a  for 
the  tribe  concerned,  while  if  it  is  a  public  case  he  enters  it  on 
the  register  of  the  Thesmothetae.  '  Then,  if  the  Thesmothetae 
accept  it,  they  bring  the  accounts  of  this  magistrate  once 

1  Reading  ratr  dyopatr,  and  accepting  Wilamowitz's  interpretation. 
The  alternative  translation,  '  on  the  days  of  the  tribal  meetings  ',  is  not 
satisfactory,  since  the  complaints  had  to  be  lodged  within  three  days. 

2  All  cases  had  to  be  brought  before  the  courts  by  some  magistrate. 
Several  instances  in  which  one  of  the  Archons,  or  the  Thesmothetae 
collectively,  or  the  Arbitrators,  or  some  other  magistrate,  performed 
this  function  for  specific  classes  of  cases  are  mentioned  in  the  following 
chapters. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

more  before  the  law-court,   and   the  decision  of  the  jury 
stands  as  the  final  judgement. 

49  The  Council  also  inspects  the  horses  belonging  to  the 
state.  If  a  man  who  has  a  good  horse  is  found  to  keep  it 
in  bad  condition,  he  is  mulcted  in  his  allowance  of  corn  ; 
while  those  which  cannot  keep  up  or  which  shy  and  will 
not  stand  steady,  it  brands  with  a  wheel  on  the  jaw,  and 
the  horse  so  marked  is  disqualified  for  service.  It  also 
inspects  those  who  appear  to  be  fit  for  service  as  scouts, 
and  any  one  whom  it  rejects  is  deprived  of  his  horse.  It 
also  examines  the  infantry  who  serve  among  the  cavalry,1 

2  and  any  one  whom  it  rejects  ceases  to  receive  his  pay.     The 
roll  of  the  cavalry  is  drawn  up  by  the  Commissioners   of 
Enrolment    [Catalogeis],    ten    in    number,   elected   by  the 
Assembly  by  open  vote.     They  hand  over  to  the  Hipparchs 
and  Phylarchs  the  list  of  those  whom  they  have  enrolled, 
and  these  officers  take  it  and  bring  it  up  before  the  Council, 
and  there  open  the  sealed  tablet  containing  the  names  of 
the  cavalry.-     If  any  of  those  who  have  been  on  the  roll 
previously  make  affidavit  that  they  are  physically  incapable 
of  cavalry  service,  they  strike  them  out ;  then  they  call  up 
the  persons  newly  enrolled,  and  if  any  one  makes  affidavit 
that   he    is    either    physically  or   pecuniarily    incapable   of 
cavalry  service  they  dismiss  him,  but  if  no  such  affidavit  is 
made  the  Council  vote  whether  the  individual  in  question 
is  suitable  for  the   purpose  or  not.     If  they  vote   in   the 
affirmative  his  name  is  entered  on  the  tablet ;  if  not,  he  is 
dismissed  with  the  others. 

3  Formerly  the  Council  used  to  decide   on   the  plans   for 
public  buildings  and  the  contract  for  making  the  robe  of 
Athena;3  but  now  this  work  is  done  by  a  jury  in  the  law- 

1  This  means  infantry  who  fought  among  the  ranks  of  the  cavalry. 
The  Trpt'.dpofVH  above  are  also  a  military  body,  meaning  light  cavalry 
who  acted  as  advance  guard  or  skirmishers.      There  was  a  special 
corps  so  named  in  the  army  of  Alexander. 

2  i.  e.  the  names  of  those  already  in  the  cavalry,  before   the   new 
enrolment. 

3  This  was  the  robe  which  was  carried  in  procession  at  the  great 
Panathenaic  festival.     It  was  embroidered  with  mythological  subjects, 
and  was  woven  on  each  occasion  by  a  number  of  girls,  under  the 
superintendence  of  two  of  superior  family. 

CHAPTER    49 

courts  appointed  by  lot,  since  the  Council  was  considered 
to  have  shown  favouritism  in  its  decisions.  The  Council 
also  shares  with  the  Military  Treasurer  the  superintendence 
of  the  manufacture  of  the  images  of  Victory  and  the  prizes 
at  the  Panathenaic  festival. 

The  Council  also  examines  infirm  paupers  ;  for  there  is  a  4 
law  which  provides  that  persons  possessing  less  than  three 
minas,  who  are  so  crippled  as  to  be  unable  to  do  any  work, 
are,  after  examination  by  the  Council,  to  receive  two  obols 
a  day  from  the  state  for  their  support.  A  treasurer  is 
appointed  by  lot  to  attend  to  them. 

The  Council  also,  speaking  broadly,  co-operates  in  most  5 
of  the  duties  of  all  the  other  magistrates;  and  this  ends  the 
list  of  the  functions  of  that  body. 

There  are  ten   Commissioners  for   Repairs   of  Temples,  50 
elected  by  lot,  who  receive  a  sum  of  thirty  minas  from  the 
Receivers-General,    and    therewith     carry    out    the    most 
necessary  repairs  in  the  temples. 

There  are  also  ten  City  Commissioners  [Astynomi],  of  2 
whom  five  hold  office  in  Piraeus  and  five  in  the  city.  Their 
duty  is  to  see  that  female  flute- and  harp- and  lute-players 
are  not  hired  at  more  than  two  drachmas,  and  if  more  than 
one  person  is  anxious  to  hire  the  same  girl,  they  cast  lots  and 
hire  her  out  to  the  person  to  whom  the  lot  falls.  They  also 
provide  that  no  collector  of  sewage  shall  shoot  any  of  his 
sewage  within  ten  stadia  of  the  walls ;  they  prevent  people 
from  blocking  up  the  streets  by  building,  or  stretching 
barriers  across  them,  or  making  drain-pipes  in  mid-air  with 
a  discharge  into  the  street,  or  having  doors !  which  open 
outwards  ;  they  also  remove  the  corpses  of  those  who  die  in 
the  streets,  for  which  purpose  they  have  a  body  of  state 
slaves  assigned  to  them. 

Market  Commissioners   [Agoranomi]  are  elected  by  lot.  51 
five  for  Piraeus,  five  for  the  city.     Their  statutory  duty  is 
to  see  that  all  articles  offered  for  sale  in  the  market  are  pure 
and  unadulterated. 

Commissioners  of  Weights  and   Measures   [Metronomi]  2 

1  Or  possibly  '  windows  '. 

ATHENIENSIL'M   RESPUBLICA 

are  elected  by  lot,  five  for  the  city,  and  five   for  Piraeus. 
They  see  that  sellers  use  fair  weights  and  measures. 

3  Formerly  there  were  ten  Corn  Commissioners  [Sitophy- 
laces],  elected  by  lot,,  five  for  Piraeus,  and  five  for  the  city; 
but   now   there   are   twenty    for   the    city    and   fifteen   for 
Piraeus.     Their  duties  are,  first,  to  see  that  the  unprepared 
corn  in  the  market  is  offered  for  sale  at  reasonable  prices, 
and  secondly,  to  see  that  the  millers  sell  barley  meal  at  a 
price  proportionate  to  that  of  barley,  and  that  the  bakers 
sell  their  loaves  at  a  price  proportionate  to  that  of  wheat, 
and  of  such  weight  as  the  Commissioners  may  appoint  ;  for 
the  law  requires  them  to  fix  the  standard  weight. 

4  There  are  ten  Superintendents  of  the  Mart,  elected  by 
lot,  whose  duty  is  to  superintend  the  Mart,  and  to  compel 
merchants  to  bring  up  into  the  city  two-thirds  of  the  corn 
which  is  brought  by  sea  to  the  Corn  Mart. 

52  The  Eleven  also  are  appointed  by  lot  to  take  care  of  the 
prisoners  in  the  state  gaol.  Thieves,  kidnappers,  and  pick 
pockets  are  brought  to  them,  and  if  they  plead  guilty  they 
are  executed,  but  if  they  deny  the  charge  the  Eleven  bring 
the  case  before  the  law-courts  ;  if  the  prisoners  are  acquitted, 
they  release  them,  but  if  not,  they  then  execute  them.  They 
also  bring  up  before  the  law-courts  the  list  of  farms  and 
houses  claimed  as  state-property ;  and  if  it  is  decided  that 
they  are  so,  they  deliver  them  to  the  Commissioners  for 
Public  Contracts.  The  Eleven  also  bring  up  informations 
laid  against  magistrates  alleged  to  be  disqualified;  this 
function  comes  within  their  province,  but  some  such  cases 
are  brought  up  by  the  Thesmothetae. 

3  There  are  also  five  Introducers  of  Cases  [Eisagogeis], 
elected  by  lot,  one  for  each  pair  of  tribes,  who  bring  up  the 
'  monthly  '  cases  '  to  the  law-courts.  '  Monthly  '  cases  are 
these  :  refusal  to  pay  up  a  dowry  where  a  party  is  bound  to  do 
so,  refusal  to  pay  interest  on  money  borrowed  at  1 2  per  cent.-', 

1  i.e.  cases  which  have  to  be  decided  within  a  month,  as  being 
considered  to  be  of  a  pressing  nature. 

"  If  the  rate  of  interest  was  higher,  the  creditor  could  not  make  use 
of  this  procedure. 

CHAPTER    52 

or  where  a  man  desirous  of  setting  up  business  in  the 
market  has  borrowed  from  another  man  capital  to  start 
with ;  also  cases  of  slander,  cases  arising  out  cf  friendly 
loans  or  partnerships,  and  cases  concerned  with  slaves,  cattle, 
and  the  office  of  trierarch,  or  with  banks.  These  are  brought  3 
up  as  '  monthly  '  cases  and  are  introduced  by  these  officers  ; 
but  the  Receivers-General  perform  the  same  function  in 
cases  for  or  against  the  farmers  of  taxes.  Those  in  which 
the  sum  concerned  is  not  more  than  ten  drachmas  they  can 
decide  summarily,  but  all  above  that  amount  they  bring 
into  the  law-courts  as  '  monthly  '  cases. 

The  Forty ]  are  also  elected  by  lot,  four  from  each  53 
tribe,  before  whom  suitors  bring  all  other  cases.  Formerly 
they  were  thirty  in  number,  and  they  went  on  circuit 
through  the  demes  to  hear  causes;  but  after  the  oligarchy 
of  the  Thirty  they  were  increased  to  forty.  They  have  full  2 
powers  to  decide  cases  in  which  the  amount  at  issue  does 
not  exceed  ten  drachmas,  but  anything  beyond  that  value 
they  hand  over  to  the  Arbitrators.  The  Arbitrators  take 
up  the  case,  and,  if  they  cannot  bring  the  parties  to  an 
agreement,  they  give  a  decision.  If  their  decision  satisfies 
both  parties,  and  they  abide  by  it,  the  case  is  at  an  end  ; 
but  if  either  of  the  parties  appeals  to  the  law-courts,  the 
Arbitrators  enclose  the  evidence,  the  pleadings,  and  the  laws 
quoted  in  the  case  in  two  urns,  those  of  the  plaintiff  in  the 
one,  and  those  of  the  defendant  in  the  other.  These  they  3 
seal  up  and,  having  attached  to  them  the  decision  of  the 
arbitrator,  written  out  on  a  tablet,  place  them  in  the 
custody  of  the  four  justices  whose  function  it  is  to  introduce 
cases  on  behalf  of  the  tribe  of  the  defendant.  These  officers 
take  them  and  bring  up  the  case  before  the  law-court,  to  a 
jury  of  two  hundred  and  one  members  in  cases  up  to  the 
value  of  a  thousand  drachmas,  or  to  one  of  four  hundred 
and  one  in  cases  above  that  value.  No  laws  or  pleadings  or 
evidence  may  be  used  except  those  which  were  adduced 

1  These  are  the  officials  elsewhere  described  as  the  local  justices, 
who  were  instituted  by  Pisistratus  (ch.  16,  5)  and  revived  in  453  B.C. 
ich.  26,  3). 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

before   the    Arbitrator,    and    have    been   enclosed    in    the 
urns. 

4  The  Arbitrators  are  persons  in  the  sixtieth  year  of  their 
age  ;  this  appears  from  the  schedule  of  the  Archons  and  the 
Eponymi.    There  are  two  classes  of  Eponymi,  the  ten  who 
give  their  names  to  the  tribes,  and  the  forty-two  of  the  years 
of  service.1     The  youths,  on    being   enrolled    among    the 
citizens,  were  formerly  registered  upon  whitened  tablets,  and 
the  names  were  appended  of  the  Archon  in  whose  year  they 
were  enrolled,  and  of  the  Eponymus  who  had  been  in  course 
in  the  preceding  year  ;  at  the  present  day  they  are  written  on 
a  bronze  pillar,  which  stands  in  front  of  the  Council-chamber, 
near  the  Eponymi  of  the  tribes.     Then  the  Forty  take  the 

5  last  of  the  Eponymi  of  the  years  of  service,  and  assign  the 
arbitrations  to  the  persons  belonging  to  that  year,  casting 
lots  to  determine  which  arbitrations  each  shall  undertake ; 
and  every  one  is  compelled  to  carry  through  the  arbitrations 
which  the  lot  assigns  to  him.    The  law  enacts  that  any  one 
who  does  not  serve  as  Arbitrator  when  he  has  arrived  at  the 
necessary  age  shall  lose  his  civil  rights,  unless  he  happens 
to  be  holding  some  other  office  during  that  year,  or  to  be 
out  of  the  country.     These  are  the  only  persons  who  escape 

6  the  duty.  Any  one  who  suffers  injustice  at  the  hands  of  the 
Arbitrator  may  appeal  to  the  whole  board  of  Arbitrators, 
and  if  they  find  the  magistrate  guilty,  the  law  enacts  that  he 
shall  lose  his  civil  rights.     The  persons  thus  condemned 

7  have,  however,  in  their  turn  an  appeal.     The  Eponymi  are 
also  used  in  reference  to  military  expeditions  ;  when  the  men 
of  military  age  are  despatched  on  service,  a  notice  is  put  up 
stating  that  the  men  from  such-and-such  an  Archon  and 

1  These  Eponymi  are  unknown  except  from  this  passage  and 
quotations  from  it  in  the  grammarians.  It  would  appear  that,  just 
as  the  Eponymi  of  the  tribes  were  the  ten  heroes  who  gave  their  names 
to  the  ten  tribes,  so  a  cycle  of  forty-two  years  was  arranged,  to  each 
of  which  the  name  of  a  hero  was  assigned  as  its  Eponymus.  Then, 
as  every  Athenian  was  liable  to  military  service  for  forty-two  years  (18 
to  59  inclusive],  each  man  had  to  go  through  the  complete  cycle  before 
he  was  free  from  liability  to  serve.  During  the  last  year  ot  his  cycle, 
however,  he  was  required  to  serve  not  as  a  soldier  but  as  an  Arbitrator  ; 
and  accordingly  each  year  the  Forty  took  the  list  of  those  who  were 
commencing  their  last  year  of  service,  and  assigned  to  them  the  duties 
which  they  were  to  undertake  as  arbitrators  during  the  year. 

CHAPTER    53 

Eponymus  to  such-and-such  another  Archon  and  Eponymus 
are  to  go  on  the  expedition. 

The  following  magistrates  also  are  elected  by  lot :  Five  54 
Commissioners  of  Roads  [Hodopoei],  who,  with  an  assigned 
body  of  public  slaves,  are  required  to  keep  the  roads  in 
order:  and  ten  Auditors,  with  ten  assistants,  to  whom  all  2 
persons  who  have  held  any  office  must  give  in  their  accounts. 
These  arc  the  only  officers  who  audit  the  accounts  of  those 
who  are  subject  to  examination,1  and  who  bring  them 
up  for  examination  before  the  law-courts.  If  they  detect 
any  magistrate  in  embezzlement,  the  jury  condemn  him 
for  theft,  and  he  is  obliged  to  repay  tenfold  the  sum  he 
is  declared  to  have  misappropriated.  If  they  charge  a  magis 
trate  with  accepting  bribes  and  the  jury  convict  him,  they 
fine  him  for  corruption,  and  this  sum  too  is  repaid  tenfold. 
Or  if  they  convict  him  of  unfair  dealing,  he  is  fined  on  that 
charge,  and  the  sum  assessed  is  paid  without  increase,  if 
payment  is  made  before  the  ninth  prytany,  but  otherwise  it 
is  doubled.  A  tenfold  fine  is  not  doubled. 

The  Clerk  of  the  Prytany,  as  he  is  called,  is  also  elected  by  ?, 
lot.    He  has  the  charge  of  all  public  documents,  and  keeps  the 
resolutions  which  are  passed  by  the  Assembly,  and  checks 
the  transcripts  of  all  other  official  papers  and  attends  at  the 
sessions  of  the  Council.     Formerly  he  was  elected  by  open 
vote,  and  the  most  distinguished  and  trustworthy  persons 
were  elected  to  the  post,  as  is  known  from  the  fact  that  the 
name  of  this  officer   is  appended  on  the  pillars  recording 
treaties  of  alliance  and  grants  of  consulship2  and  citizenship. 
Now,  however,  he  is  elected  by  lot.     There  is,  in  addition,  4 
a  Clerk  of  the  Laws,  elected  by  lot,   who  attends  at  the 
sessions  of  the  Council  ;  and  he  too  checks  the  transcript  of 
all  the   laws.     The   Assembly   also    elects    by   open    vote  * 
a  clerk  to  read  documents  to  it  and  to  the  Council ;  but 
he  has  no  other  duty  except  that  of  reading  aloud. 

1  Every  person  who  had  held  any  public  office  had  to  submit  himself 
and  his  accounts  to  examination  before  a  jury  at  the  end  of  his  term  of 
office ;  on  which  occasion  any  citizen  might  impeach  his  conduct 
during  his  o'ffice. 

"  i.  e.  of  representation  ol  a  foreign  state. 

ATHKNIENSTUM    RESPUBLICA 

6  The  Assembly  also  elects  by  lot  the  Commissioners  of 
Public  Worship  [Hieropoei],  known  as  the  Commissioners 
for  Sacrifices,  who  offer  the  sacrifices  appointed  by  oracle, 
and,  in  conjunction  with  the  seers,  take  the  auspices  whenever 

7  there  is  occasion.     It  also  elects  by  lot  ten  others,  known  as 
Annual    Commissioners,   who  offer  certain  sacrifices   and 
administer  all  the   quadrennial  festivals   except  the    Pan- 
athenaea.    There  are  the  following  quadrennial  festivals: 
first  that  of  Delos  (where  there  is  also  a  sexennial  festival), 
secondly  the  Brauronia,  thirdly  the  Heracleia,  fourthly  the 
Eleusinia,  and  fifthly  the  Panathenaea  ;  and  no  two  of  these 
are  celebrated  in  the  same  place.1  To  these  the  Hephaestia 
has  now  been  added,  in  the  archonship  of  Cephisophon.2 

8  An  Archon  is  also  elected  by  lot   for  Salamis,  and    a 
Demarch  for  Piraeus.    These  officers  celebrate  the  Dionysia 
in  these  two   places,  and   appoint   Choregi.     In    Salamis. 
moreover,  the  name  of  the  Archon  is  publicly  recorded. 

55  All  the  foregoing  magistrates  are  elected  by  lot,  and 
their  powers  are  those  which  have  been  stated.  To  pass  on 
to  the  nine  Archons,  as  they  are  called,  the  manner  of  their 
appointment  from  the  earliest  times  has  been  described 
already.  At  the  present  day  six  Thesmothetae  are  elected 
by  lot,  together  with  their  clerk,  and  in  addition  to  these  an 
Archon,  a  King,  and  a  Polemarch.  One  is  elected  from 
j  each  tribe.  They  are  examined  first  of  all  by  the  Council 
of  Five  Hundred,  with  the  exception  of  the  clerk.  The 
latter  is  examined  only  in  the  law-court,  like  other  magis 
trates  (for  all  magistrates,  whether  elected  by  lot  or  by 
open  vote,  are  examined  before  entering  on  their  offices) ; 
but  the  nine  Archons  are  examined  both  in  the  Council  and 
again  in  the  law-court.  Formerly  no  one  could  hold  the 
office  if  the  Council  rejected  him,  but  now  there  is  an 
appeal  to  the  law-court,  which  is  the  final  authority  in  the 
3  matter  of  the  examination.  When  they  are  examined.,  they 

1  The  reading  is  rather  doubtful,  and  the  meaning  might  be  '  no  two 
of  them  take  place  in  the  same  year';  but  with  five  festivals  in  to 
years,  two  of  them  must  have  fallen  in  the  same  year. 

2  This  date  (329  B.  c.)  gives  us  a  limit  of  time  after  which  this  work 
must  have  been  written,  or  (since  the  words  have  the  air -of  a  paren 
thetical  or  later  addition!  at  least  revised.    See  note  5  on  ch.  46,  I. 

CHAPTER   55 

are  asked,  first.  '  Who  is  your  father,  and  of  what  deme  ? 
who  is  your  father's  father  ?  who  is  your  mother  ?  who  is 
your  mother's  father,  and  of  what  deme  ?  '  Then  the  candi 
date  is  asked  whether  he  possesses  an  ancestral  Apollo  and 
a  household  Zeus,  and  where  their  sanctuaries  are  ;  next  if  he 
possesses  a  family  tomb,  and  where  ;  then  if  he  treats  his 
parents  well,  and  pays  his  taxes,  and  has  served  on  the 
required  military  expeditions.  When  the  examiner  has  put 
these  questions,  he  proceeds,  '  Call  the  witnesses  to  these 
facts';  and  when  the  candidate  has  produced  his  witnesses,  4 
he  next  asks,  '  Does  any  one  wish  to  make  any  accusation 
against  this  man?'  If  an  accuser  appears,  he  gives  the 
parties  an  opportunity  of  making  their  accusation  and 
defence,  and  then  puts  it  to  the  Council  to  pass  the  candi 
date  or  not,  and  to  the  law-court  to  give  the  final  vote.  If 
no  one  wishes  to  make  an  accusation,  he  proceeds  at  once  to 
the  vote.  Formerly  a  single  individual  gave  the  vote,  but 
now  all  the  members  are  obliged  to  vote  on  the  candidates, 
so  that  if  any  unprincipled  candidate  has  managed  to  get  rid 
of  his  accusers,1  it  may  still  be  possible  for  him  to  be 
disqualified  before  the  law-court.  When  the  examination  5 
has  been  thus  completed,  they  proceed  to  the  stone  on  which 
are  the  pieces  of  the  victims,  and  on  which  the  Arbitrators 
take  oath  before  declaring  their  decisions,  and  witnesses 
swear  to  their  testimony.  On  this  stone  the  Archons  stand, 
and  swear  to  execute  their  office  uprightly  and  according  to 
the  laws,  and  not  to  receive  presents  in  respect  of  the  per 
formance  of  their  duties,  or,  if  they  do,  to  dedicate  a  golden 
statue.  When  they  have  taken  this  oath  they  proceed  to 
the  Acropolis,  and  there  they  repeat  it ;  after  this  they  enter 
upon  their  office. 

The  Archon,  the  King,  and  the  Polemarch  have  each  two  56 
assessors,    nominated    by    themselves.     These   officers    are 

1  i.  e.  by  inducing  them  not  to  press  their  charges.  It  appears  that 
originally,  if  no  accusation  was  brought  before  the  Council,  the  exami 
nation  by  the  law-court  was  a  mere  formality,  a  single  member  voting 
for  the  whole  jury.  But  it  was  found  that  candidates  sometimes 
escaped  an  accusation  before  the  Council  by  '  squaring  '  their  accusers  ; 
and  to  meet  this  the  law-court  was  made  to  examine  and  vote 
independently. 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

examined  in  the  law-court  before  they  begin  to  act,  and 
give  in  accounts  on  each  occasion  of  their  acting, 
a      As  soon  as  the  Archon  enters  office,  he  begins  by  issuing 
a  proclamation  that  whatever  any  one  possessed  before  he 
entered  into  office,  that  he  shall  possess  and  hold  until  the 

3  end  of  his  term.     Next%  he  assigns  Choregi  to  the  tragic 
poets,  choosing  three1  of  the  richest  persons   out  of  the 
whole  body  of  Athenians.     Formerly  he  used  also  to  assign 
five  Choregi  to  the  comic  poets,  but  now  the  tribes  provide 
the    Choregi    for   them.     Then   he    receives    the   Choregi 
who  have  been  appointed  by  the  tribes  for  the  men's  and 
boys'  choruses2  and  the  comic  poets  at  the  Dionysia,  and 
for   the  men's    and    boys'  choruses  at  the    Thargelia    (at 
the  Dionysia  there  is  a  chorus  for  each  tribe,  but  at  the 
Thargelia  one  between  two  tribes,   each  tribe  bearing  its 
share  in  providing  it);  he  transacts  the  exchanges  of  properties 
for  them,3  and  reports  any  excuses  that  are  tendered,  if 
any  one  says  that  he  has  already  borne  this  burden,  or  that 
he  is  exempt  because  he  has  borne  a  similar  burden  and 
the  period  of  his  exemption  has  not  yet  expired,  or  that  he 
is  not  of  the  required  age  ;  since  the  Choregus  of  a  boys' 

4  chorus  must  be  over  forty  years  of  age.    He  also  appoints 
Choregi  for  the  festival  at  Delos,  and  a  chief  of  the  mission4 
for  the  thirty-oar  boat  which  conveys  the  youths  thither. 
He  also  superintends  sacred  processions,  both  that  in  honour 
of  Asclepius,  when  the  initiated  keep  house,  and  that  of  the 

1  Only  three  tragic  poets  might  contend  at  the  festivals,  and  it  was 
the  duty  of  the  Archon  to  decide  what  poets  should  be  admitted  to  the 
honour.  In  Comedy,  as  stated  below,  five  competitors  were  allowed, 
but  this  number  applies  only  to  the  fourth  century,  before  which  time 
the  number  was  limited  to  three.  The  duty  of  the  Choregus  was  to 
defray  the  expense  of  training,  maintaining,  and  equipping  the  chorus 
required  for  a  play  or  a  dithyrambic  contest. 

*  These  are  dithyrambic  choruses,  which  were  quite  unconnected 
with  the  dramatic  representations,  and  in  which  the  several  tribes 
competed  against  one  another. 

8  If  any  person  considered  that  he  had  been  unduly  saddled  with 
one  of  the  burdens  which  rich  men  were  called  upon  to  bear  for  the 
state  (such  as  the  equipment  of  a  chorus  or  a  trireme),  he  might  require 
any  one  on  whom  he  thought  the  burden  should  rather  have  been  laid 
either  to  undertake  it,  or  else  to  submit  to  an  exchange  of  properties. 

4  i.e.  chiefs  of  the  sacred  deputation  sent  from  Athens  to  the  Delian 
festival.  It  is  uncertain  whether  there  was  more  than  one  such  chief, 
and  some  editors  read  dpxiQ«>>[i>ovs], 

CHAPTER   56 

great  Dionysia — the  latter  in  conjunction  with  the  Superin 
tendents  of  that  festival.  These  officers,  ten  in  number, 
were  formerly  elected  by  open  vote  in  the  Assembly,  and 
used  to  provide  for  the  expenses  of  the  procession  out  of 
their  private  means ;  but  now  one  is  elected  by  lot  from 
each  tribe,  and  the  state  contributes  a  hundred  minas  for  the 
expenses.  The  Archon  also  superintends  the  procession  5 
at  the  Thargelia,  and  that  in  honour  of  Zeus  the  Saviour. 
He  also  manages  the  contests  at  the  Dionysia  and  the 
Thargelia. 

These,  then,  are  the  festivals  which  he  superintends. 
The  suits  and  indictments  which  come  before  him,  and  6 
which  he,  after  a  preliminary  inquiry,  brings,  up  before 
the  law-courts,  are  as  follows.  Injury  to  parents  (for 
bringing  these  actions  the  prosecutor  cannot  suffer  any 
penalty)  -,1  injury  to  orphans  (these  actions  lie  against  their 
guardians) ;  injury  to  a  ward  of  state  (these  lie  against 
their  guardians  or  their  husbands)  ;2  injury  to  an  orphan's 
estate  (these  too  lie  against  the  guardians) ;  mental  derange 
ment,  where  a  party  charges  another  with  destroying  his 
own  property  through  unsoundness  of  mind  ;  for  appoint 
ment  of  liquidators,  where  a  party  refuses  to  divide  property 
in  which  others  have  a  share ;  for  constituting  a  wardship  ; 
for  determining  between  rival  claims  to  a  wardship ;  for 
granting  inspection  of  property  to  which  another  party  lays 
claim  ;  for  appointing  oneself  as  guardian  ;  and  for  deter 
mining  disputes  as  to  inheritances  and  wards  of  state.  The  7 
Archon  also  has  the  care  of  orphans  and  wards  of  state, 
and  of  women  who,  on  the  death  of  their  husbands,  declare 
themselves  to  be  with  child ;  and  he  has  power  to  inflict 
a  fine  on  those  who  offend  against  the  persons  under  his 
charge,  or  to  bring  the  case  before  the  law-courts.  He  also 
leases  the  houses  of  orphans  and  wards  of  state  until  they 
reach  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  takes  mortgages  on  them  ; 
and  if  the  guardians  fail  to  provide  the  necessary  food  for 

1  In  most  cases  the  prosecutor  was  subject  to  penalties  if  he  failed  to 
receive  a  fifth  part  of  the  votes  of  the  jury. 

2  The  state  still  continued  its  protection  of  heiresses  even  after  they 
were  married.      It  scare  only  ceased  when  they  had  children  capable 
of  inheriting  the  property. 

F   2 

ATHENIKNSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

the  children   under  their  charge,  he  exacts  it  from  them. 
Such  are  the  duties  of  the  Archon. 

The  King  in  the  first  place  superintends  the  mysteries,  in 
conjunction  with  the  Superintendents  of  Mysteries, 
latter  are  elected  in  the  Assembly  by  open  vote,  two  froi 
the  general  body  of  Athenians,  one  from  the  Eumolpidae 
and  one  from   the    Ceryces.      Next,   he   superintends  the 
Lenaean  Dionysia,1  which  consists  of  a  procession  and  a  o 
test.     The    procession    is    ordered   by  the  King    and 
Superintendents  in  conjunction  ;  but  the  contest  is  managed 
by  the  King  alone.     He  also  manages  all  the  contests  of  1 
torch-race  ;    and  to  speak  broadly,  he  administers  all 

2  ancestral  sacrifices.  Indictmentsfor  impietycome  before 
or   any  disputes  between  parties  concerning  priestly  rit 
and  he  also  determines  all  controversies  concerning  sacred 
rites  for  the  ancient  families »  and  the  priests.     All  actions  for 
homicide  come  before  him,  and  it  is  he   that  makes   the 
proclamation  requiring  polluted  persons  to  keep  away  from 

3  sacred  ceremonies.     Actions  for  homicide   and  wounding 
are  heard,  if  the  homicide  or  wounding  be  wilful,  in  the 
Areopagus;  so  also  in  cases  of  killing  by  poison,  and  of 
arson.     These  are  the  only  cases  heard  by  that  Council 
Cases  of  unintentional  homicide,  or  of  intent  to  kill,  or  of 
killing  a  slave  or  a  resident  alien  or  a  foreigner,  are  heard 
by  the  court  of  Palladium.     When  the  homicide  is  acknow 
ledged,  but  legal  justification  is  pleaded,  as  when  a  man  takes 
an  adulterer  in  the  act,  or  kills  another  by  mistake  in  battle, 
or  in  an  athletic  contest,  the  prisoner  is  tried  in  the  court  of 
Delphinium.     If  a  man  who  is  in  banishment  for  a  homicide 
which  admits  of  reconciliation 3  incurs  a  further  charge  of 
killing  or  wounding,  he  is  tried  in  Phreatto,  and  he  makes 

1  The  lesser  of  the  two  chief  festivals  of  Dionysus,  held  in  January. 
Many  oi  the  plays  which  have  come  down  to  us  were  first  performed 
at  1 hfs  festival,  but  it  was  not  such  a  magnificent  occasion  as  the  great 
Dionysia,  at  which  strangers  from  the  rest  ot  Greece  were  usually 
present  in  great  numbers. 

'-'  See  note  2  on  ch.  20,  2. 

a  A  person  who  committed  an  involuntary  homicide  had  to  give 
pecuniary  satisfaction  to  the  relatives  of  the  deceased,  and  he  was 
compelled  to  go  into  exile  for  a  year  unless  they  gave  him  leave  to 
return  earlier. 

CHAPTER   57 

his  defence  from  a  boat  moored  near  the  shore.  All  these  4 
cases,  except  those  which  are  heard  in  the  Areopagus,  are 
tried  by  the  Ephetae  on  whom  the  lot  falls.1  The  King 
introduces  them,  and  the  hearing  is  held  within  sacred  pre 
cincts  and  in  the  open  air.  Whenever  the  King  hears  a  case 
he  takes  off  his  crown.  The  person  who  is  charged  with 
homicide  is  at  all  other  times  excluded  from  the  temples, 
nor  is  it  even  lawful  for  him  to  enter  the  market-place  ;  but 
on  the  occasion  of  his  trial  he  enters  the  temple  and  makes 
his  defence.  If  the  actual  offender  is  unknown,  the  writ 
runs  against  '  the  doer  of  the  deed '.  The  King  and  the 
tribe-kings  also  hear  the  cases  in  which  the  guilt  rests  on 
inanimate  objects  and  the  lower  animals.2 

The  Polemarch  performs  the  sacrifices  to  Artemis  the  58 
huntress  and  to  Enyalius,  and  arranges  the  contest  at 
the  funeral  of  those  who  have  fallen  in  war,  and  makes 
offerings  to  the  memory  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton. 
Only  private  actions  come  before  him,  namely  those  in  which  3 
resident  aliens,  both  ordinary  and  privileged,  and  agents  of 
foreign  states  are  concerned.  It  is  his  duty  to  receive  these 
cases  and  divide  them  into  ten  groups,  and  assign  to  each 
tribe  the  group  which  comes  to  it  by  lot ;  after  which  the 
magistrates  who  introduce  cases  for  the  tribe  hand  them 
over  to  the  Arbitrators.  The  Polemarch,  however,  brings  ?, 
up  in  person  cases  in  which  an  alien  is  charged  with  deserting 
his  patron  or  neglecting  to  provide  himself  with  one,3  and 
also  of  inheritances  and  wards  of  state  where  aliens  are 
concerned  ;  and  in  fact,  generally,  whatever  the  Archon  does 
for  citizens,  the  Polemarch  does  for  aliens. 

The  Thesmothetae  in  the  first  place  have  the  power  of  59 

1  The  Ephetae  were  a  very  ancient  board  of  magistrates  who  used 
to  hear  these  kinds  of  cases,  but  whether  they  are  spoken  of  here  is 
doubtful,  as  the  word  in  the  MS.  is  lost  in  a  lacuna.     It  is,  however, 
supplied  from  passages  in  Harpocration  and  other  grammarians. 

2  This  is  a  relic  of  a  very  primitive  custom,  by  which  any  object  that 
had  caused  a  man's  death  was  put  upon  its  trial.    In  later  times  it  may 
have  served  the  purpose  of  a  coroner's  inquest.  Cases  of  this  kind,  and 
those  in  which  the  culprit  was  unknown,  were  tried  in  the  court  of  the 
Prytaneum,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  name  occurred  in  the  treatise, 
but  has  dropped  out  of  the  MS. 

3  Every  alien  resident  in  Athens  was  required  to  provide  himself 
with  a  patron  from  among  the  citizens. 

v  3 

ATHENIENSIUM   RKSPUBLICA 

prescribing  on  what  days  the  law-courts  are  to  sit,  and  next 
of  assigning  them  to  the  several  magistrates  ;  for  the  latter 
must  follow  the  arrangement  which  the  Thesmothetae  assign. 
»  Moreover  they  introduce  impeachments  before  the  Assembly, 
and  bring  up  all  votes  for  removal  from  office,  challenges  of 
a  magistrate's  conduct  before  the  Assembly,  indictments  for 
illegal  proposals,  or  for  proposing  a  law  which  is  contrary 
to  the  interests  of  the  state,  complaints  against  Proedri  or 
their  president  for  their  conduct  in  office,  and  the  accounts 

3  presented    by   the   generals.     All    indictments   also    come 
before  them  in  which  a  deposit  has  to  be  made   by  the 
prosecutor,  namely,  indictments  for  concealment  of  foreign 
origin,  for  corrupt  evasion  of  foreign  origin  (when  a  man 
escapes  the  disqualification   by  bribery),  for  blackmailing 
accusations,  bribery,  false  entry  of  another  as  a  state  debtor, 
false  testimony  to  the  service  of  a  summons,  conspiracy  to 
enter  a  man  as  a  state  debtor,  corrupt  removal  from  the  list 

4  of  debtors,  and  adultery.     They  also  bring  up  the  examina 
tions  of  all  magistrates,1  and  the  rejections  by  the  demes 

5  and  the  condemnations   by  the    Council.     Moreover  they 
bring  up  certain  private  suits  in  cases  of  merchandise  and 
mines,  or  where  a  slave  has  slandered  a  free  man.     It  is  they 
also  who  cast  lots  to  assign  the  courts  to  the  various  magis- 

6  trates,  whether  for   private  or  public   cases.     They  ratify 
commercial  treaties,  and  bring  up  the  cases  which  arise  out 
of  such  treaties  ;  and  they  also  bring  up  cases  of  perjury 

7  from  the  Areopagus.     The  casting  of  lots  for  the  jurors  is 
conducted  by  all  the  nine  Archons,  with  the  clerk  to  the 
Thesmothetae  as  the  tenth,  each  performing  the  duty  for  his 
own  tribe.     Such  are  the  duties  of  the  nine  Archons. 

60  There  are  also  ten  Commissioners  of  Games [Athlothetae], 
elected  by  lot,  one  from  each  tribe.  These  officers,  after 
passing  an  examination,  serve  for  four  years  ;  and  they 
manage  the  Panathenaic  procession,  the  contest  in  music 
and  that  in  gymnastic,  and  the  horse-race  ;  they  also  provide 
the  robe  of  Athena-  and,  in  conjunction  with  the  Council, 

1  i.  e.  the  examination  to  which  all  magistrates  were  subjected  before 
entering  office.     See  ch.  55,  2. 

2  See  note  3  on  ch.  49,  3. 

CHAPTER   60 

the  vases,1  and  they  present  the  oil  to  the  athletes. 
This  oil  is  collected  from  the  sacred  olives.  The  Archon  2 
requisitions  it  from  the  owners  of  the  farms  on  which 
the  sacred  olives  grow,  at  the  rate  of  three-quarters  of  a 
pint  from  each  plant.  Formerly  the  state  used  to  sell  the 
fruit  itself,  and  if  any  one  dug  up  or  broke  down  one  of  the 
sacred  olives,  he  was  tried  by  the  Council  of  Areopagus, 
and  if  he  was  condemned,  the  penalty  was  death.  Since, 
however,  the  oil  has  been  paid  by  the  owner  of  the  farm,  the 
procedure  has  lapsed,  though  the  law  remains  ;  and  the  oil 
is  a  state  charge  upon  the  property  instead  of  being  taken 
from  the  individual  plants.2  When,  then,  the  Archon  has  3 
collected  the  oil  for  his  year  of  office,  he  hands  it  over  to  the 
Treasurers  to  preserve  in  the  Acropolis,  and  he  may  not  take 
his  seat  in  the  Areopagus  until  he  has  paid  over  to  the 
Treasurers  the  full  amount.  The  Treasurers  keep  it  in  the 
Acropolis  until  the  Panathenaea,  when  they  measure  it  out 
to  the  Commissioners  of  Games,  and  they  again  to  the  victo 
rious  competitors.  The  prizes  for  the  victors  in  the  musical 
contest  consist  of  silver  and  gold,  for  the  victors  in  manly 
vigour,  of  shields,  and  for  the  victors  in  the  gymnastic  con 
test  and  the  horse-race,  of  oil. 

All  officers  connected  with  military  service  are  elected  by  g 
open  vote.  In  the  first  place,  ten  Generals  [Strategi],  who 
were  formerly  elected  one  from  each  tribe,  but  now  are 
chosen  from  the  whole  mass  of  citizens.  Their  duties  are 
assigned  to  them  by  open  vote  ;  one  is  appointed  to  com 
mand  the  heavy  infantry,  and  leads  them  if  they  go  out  to 
war  ;  one  to  the  defence  of  the  country,  who  remains  on  the 
defensive,  and  fights  if  there  is  war  within  the  borders  of  the 
country ;  two  to  Piraeus,  one  of  whom  is  assigned  to 
Munichia.  and  one  to  the  south  shore,  and  these  have  charge 
of  the  defence  of  the  Piraeus;  and  one  to  superintend  the 

1  The  vases  given  as  prizes  at  the  Panathenaea,  of  which  a  consider 
able  number  still  exist. 

2  The  meaning  is  that  the  oil  is  now  a  fixed  charge  on  the  estate,  so 
that  the  owner  would  be  liable  for  the  amount,  whatever  happened  to 
the  plants. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

symmories,1  who  nominates  the  trierarchs3  and  arranges 
exchanges  of  properties 3  for  them,  and  brings  up  actions  to 
decide  on  rival  claims  in  connexion  with  them.  The  rest 
are  dispatched  to  whatever  business  may  be  on  hand  at  the 

3  moment.     The  appointment  of  these  officers  is  submitted 
for  confirmation  in  each  prytany,  when  the  question  is  put 
whether  they  are  considered  to  be  doing  their  duty.     If  any 
officer  is  rejected  on  this  vote,  he  is  tried  in  the  law-court, 
and  if  he  is  found  guilty  the  people  decide  what  punishment 
or  fine  shall  be  inflicted  on  him  ;  but  if  he  is  acquitted  he 
resumes  his  office.     The  Generals  have  full  power,  when  on 
active  service,  to  arrest  any  one  for  insubordination,  or  to 
cashier  him  publicly,  or  to  inflict  a  fine  ;  the  latter  is,  however, 
unusual. 

There  are  also  ten  Taxiarchs,  one  from  each  tribe,  elected 
by  open  vote;  and  each  commands  his  own  tribesmenand 

4  appoints  captains  of  companies  [Lochagi].  There  arealso  two 
Hipparchs,  elected  by  open  vote  from  the  whole  mass  of  the 
citizens,  who  command  the  cavalry,  each  taking  five  tribes. 
They  have  the  same  powers  as  the  Generals  have  in  respect 
of  the  infantry,  and  their  appointments  are  also  subject  to 

5  confirmation.     There  are  also  ten  Phylarchs,  elected  by  open 
vote,  one  from  each  tribe,  to  command  the  cavalry,  as  the 

6  Taxiarchs  do  the  infantry.     There  is  also  a  Hipparch  for 
Lemnos,  elected  by  open  vote,  who  has  charge  of  the  cavalry 

7  in  Lemnos.     There  is  also  a  treasurer  of  the  Paralus,  and 
another  of  the  Ammonias,  similarly  elected.4 

62       Of  the  magistrates  elected  by  lot,  in  former  times  some 

1  The  companies  into  which  the  richer  members  of  the  community 
were  formed  (first  in  377  B.  C.)  for  the  payment  of  the  extraordinary 
charges  in  war-time. 

1  The  trierarchs  were  the  persons  (chosen  from  the  richest  mei 
the  community)  who  were  required  to  undertake  the  equipment  of 
a  trireme  at  their  own  expense.  Like  the  office  of  Choregus  (ch.  56,  3,  4) 
it  was  a  public  duty  performed  by  private  individuals. 

3  See  note  3  on  ch.  56,  3. 

4  These  are  the  two  triremes,  usually  known  as  '  sacred  ,  whicl 
were  used  for  special  state  services.     According  to  the  grammarians 
the  two  originally  so  employed  were  the  Paralus  and  Salamima  ;  e.g. 
it  was  the  latter  that  was  sent  to  fetch  Alcibiades  back  from  Sicily  to 
stand  his  trial.    The  Ammonias  appears  to  have  taken  the  place  of  the 
Salaminia  in  the  time  of  Alexander,  when  the  Athenians  sent  sacnfi 

to  the  god  Ammon  in  it. 

CHAPTER   62 

including  the  nine  Archons,  were  elected  out  of  the  tribe  as 
a  whole,  while  others,  namely  those  who  are  now  elected  in 
the  Theseum,  were  apportioned  among  the  demes  ;  but 
since  the  demes  used  to  sell  the  elections,  these  magistrates 
too  are  now  elected  from  the  whole  tribe,  except  the  members 
of  the  Council  and  the  guards  of  the  dockyards,  who  are 
still  left  to  the  demes. 

Pay  is  received  for  the  following  services.  First 
members  of  the  Assembly  receive  a  drachma  for  the  ordinary 
meetings,  and  nine  obols  for  the  '  sovereign '  meeting.  Then 
the  jurors  at  the  law-courts  receive  three  obols ;  and  the 
members  of  the  Council  five  obols.  The  Prytanes  receive 
an  allowance  of  an  obol  for  their  maintenance.  The  nine 
Archons  receive  four  obols  apiece  for  maintenance,  and  also 
keep  a  herald  and' a  flute-player;  and  the  Archon  for 
Salamis  receives  a  drachma  a  day.  The  Commissioners  for 
Games  dine  in  the  Prytaneum  during  the  month  of  Heca- 
tombaeon  in  which  the  Panathenaic  festival  takes  place,from 
the  fourteenth  day  onwards.  The  Amphictyonic  deputies 
to  Delos  receive  a  drachma  a  day  from  the  exchequer 
of  Delos.  Also  all  magistrates  sent  to  Samos,  Scyros, 
Lemnos,  or  Imbros  receive  anallowance  fortheirmaintenance. 
The  military  offices  may  be  held  any  number  of  times,  but  3 
none  of  the  others  more  than  once,  except  the  membership 
of  the  Council,  which  may  be  held  twice. 

The  juries  for  the  law-courts  are  chosen  by  lot  by  the  nine  63 
Archons,  each  for  their  own  tribe,  and  by  the  clerk  to  the 
Thesmothetae  for  the  tenth.  There  are  ten  entrances  into  2 
the  courts,  one  for  each  tribe  ;  twenty  rooms  in  which  the 
lots  are  drawn,  two  for  each  tribe  ;  a  hundred  chests,  ten  for 
each  tribe ;  other  chests,  in  which  are  placed  the  tickets  of 
the  jurors  on  whom  the  lot  falls  ;  and  two  vases.  Further, 
staves,  equal  in  number  to  the  jurors  required,  are  placed  by 
the  side  of  each  entrance  ;  and  counters  are  put  into  one 
vase,  equal  in  number  to  the  staves.  These  are  inscribed 
•  with  letters  of  the  alphabet  beginning  with  the  eleventh 
(lambda),  equal  in  number  to  the  courts  which  require  to  be 
filled.  All  persons  above  thirty  years  of  age  are  qualified  to  3 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

serve  as  jurors,  provided  they  are  not  debtors  to  the  state 
and  have  not  lost  their  civil  rights.  If  any  unqualified  per 
son  serves  as  juror,  an  information  is  laid  against  him,  and 
he  is  brought  before  the  court ;  and,  if  he  is  convicted,  the 
jurors  assess  the  punishment  or  fine  which  they  consider  him 
to  deserve.  If  he  is  condemned  to  a  money  fine,  he  must 
be  imprisoned  until  he  has  paid  up  both  the  original  debt, 
on  account  of  which  the  information  was  laid  against  him, 
and  also  the  fine  which  the  court  has  imposed  upon  him. 

4  Each  juror  has  his  ticket  of  box-wood,  on  which  is  inscribed 
his  name,  with  the  name  of  his  father  and  his  deme,  and  one 
of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  up  to  kappa  ; l  for  the  jurors  in 
their  several  tribes  are  divided  into  ten  sections,  with  approxi- 

5  mately  an  equal  number  in  each  letter.     When  the  Thesmo- 
thetes  has  decided  by  lot  which  letters  are  required  to  attend 
at  the  courts,  the  servant  puts  up  above  each  court  the  letter 
which  has  been  assigned  to  it  by  the  lot. 

64  The  ten  chests  above  mentioned  are  placed  in  front  of  the 
entrance  used  by  each  tribe,  and  are  inscribed  with  the 
letters  of  the  alphabet  from  alpha  to  kappa.  The  jurors 
cast  in  their  tickets,  each  into  the  chest  on  which  is 
inscribed  the  letter  which  is  on  his  ticket;  then  the  ser 
vant  shakes  them  all  up,  and  the  Archon  draws  one 

a  ticket  from  each  chest.  The  individual  so  selected  is  called 
the  Ticket-hanger  [Empectes],  and  his  function  is  to  hang  up 
the  tickets  out  of  his  chest  on  the  bar  which  bears  the  same 
letter  as  that  on  the  chest.  He  is  chosen  by  lot,  lest,  if  the 
Ticket-hanger  were  always  the  same  person,  he  might  tamper 
with  the  results.  There  are  five  of  these  bars  in  each  of  the 

3  rooms  assigned  for  the  lot-drawing.  Then  the  Archon  casts 
in  the  dice  and  thereby  chooses  the  jurors  from  each  tribe, 
room  by  room.  The  dice  are  made  of  brass,  coloured  black  or 
white ;  and  according  to  the  number  of  jurors  required, 
so  many  white  dice  are  put  in,  one  for  each  five  tickets,  while 

1  The  tenth  letter  of  the  alphabet.  Thus  the  whole  body  of  jurors 
was  divided  into  ten  sections,  indicated  by  the  letters  from  alpha  to 
kappa  •  and  the  courts  for  which  jurors  were  required  were  indicated 
by  the  requisite  number  of  letters  from  lambda  onwards. 

CHAPTER   64 

the  remainder  are  black,  in  the  same  proportion.1  As  the 
Archon  draws  out  the  dice,  the  crier  calls  out  the  names 
of  the  individuals  chosen.  The  Ticket-hanger  is  included 
among  those  selected.  Each  juror,  as  he  is  chosen  and  4 
answers  to  his  name,  draws  a  counter  from  the  vase,  and 
holding  it  out  with  the  letter  uppermost  shows  it  first  to  the 
presiding  Archon ;  and  he,  when  he  has  seen  it,  throws  the 
ticket  of  the  juror  into  the  chest  on  which  is  inscribed  the 
letter  which  is  on  the  counter,  so  that  the  juror  must  go  into 
the  court  assigned  to  him  by  lot,  and  not  into  one  chosen  by 
himself,  and  that  it  may  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  collect 
the  jurors  of  his  choice  into  any  particular  court.  For  this  5 
purpose  chests  are  placed  near  the  Archon,  as  many  in 
number  as  there  are  courts  to  be  filled  that  day,  bearing  the 
letters  of  the  courts  on  which  the  lot  has  fallen. 

The  juror  thereupon,  after  showing  his  counter  again  to  65 
the  attendant,  passes  through  the  barrier  into  the  court. 
The  attendant  gives  him  a  staff  of  the  same  colour  as  the 
court  bearing  the  letter  which  is  on  his  counter,  so  as  to 
ensure  his  going  into  the  court  assigned  to  him   by  lot ; 
since,  if  he  were  to  go  into  any  other,  he  would  be  betrayed 
by  the  colour  .of  his  staff.     Each  court  has  a  certain  colour  a 
painted  on  the   lintel  of  the  entrance.     Accordingly   the 
juror,  bearing  his  staff,  enters  the  court  which  has  the  same 
colour  as  his  staff,  and  the  same  letter  as  his  counter.     As 
he  enters,  he  receives  a  voucher  from  the  official  to  whom 
this  duty  has  been  assigned  by  lot.     So  with  their  counters  3 
and  their  staves  the  selected  jurors  take  their  seats  in  the 
court,  having  thus  completed  the  process  of  admission.  The 
unsuccessful  candidates  receive  back  their  tickets  from  the 
Ticket-hangers.     The  public  servants  carry  the  chests  from  4 
each  tribe,  one  to  each  court,  containing  the  names  of  the 
members  of  the  tribe  who  are  in  that  court,  and  hand  them 

1  Thus  the  process  of  selection  is  as  follows.  The  Ticket-hanger 
arranges  all  the  tickets  on  a  bar,  which  establishes  their  order.  Then 
the  Archon  draws  a  die  ;  if  it  is  white,  the  owners  of  the  first  five 
tickets  on  the  bar  serve  on  the  jury,  while  if  it  is  black  they  are 
rejected  ;  and  so  on  through  the  whole  number.  The  selected  jurors 
are  then  assigned  to  the  several  courts  in  accordance  with  the  lots 
drawn  from  the  vases. 

ATHENIENSIUM    RESPUBLICA 

over  to  the  officials1  assigned  to  the  duty  of  giving  back 
their  tickets  to  the  jurors  in  each  court,  so  that  these  officials 
may  call  them  up  by  name  and  pay  them  their  fee. 

66  When  all  the  courts  are  full,  two  ballot  boxes  are  placed  in 
the  first  court,  and  a  number  of  brazen  dice,  bearing  the 
colours  of  the  several  courts,  and  other  dice  inscribed  with 
the  names  of  the  presiding  magistrates.  Then  two  of  the 
Thesmothetae,  selected  by  lot,  severally  throw  the  dice  with 
the  colours  into  one  box,  and  those  with  the  magistrates' 
names  into  the  other.  The  magistrate  whose  name  is  first 
drawn  is  thereupon  proclaimed  by  the  crier  as  assigned  for 
duty  in  the  court  which  is  first  drawn,  and  the  second  in  the 
second,  and  similarly  with  the  rest.  The  object  of  this 
procedure  is  that  no  one  may  know  which  court  he  will 
have,  but  that  each  may  take  the  court  assigned  to  him 

by  lot. 

2  When  the  jurors  have  come  in,  and  have  been  assigned  to 
their   respective    courts,  the  presiding  magistrate  in ^  each 
court  draws  one  ticket  out  of  each  chest  (making  ten  in  all, 
one  out  of  each  tribe),  and  throws  them  into  another  empty 
chest.     He  then  draws  out  five  of  them,  and  assigns  one 
to  the  superintendence  of  the  water-clock,  and  the  other 
four  to  the  telling  of  the  votes.     This  is  to  prevent  any 
tampering  beforehand  with  either  the  superintendent  of  the 
clock  or  the  tellers  of  the  votes,  and  to  secure  that  there  is 

3  no  malpractice  in  these  respects.     The  five  who  have  not 
been  selected  for  these  duties  receive  from  them  a  statement 
of  the  order  in  which  the  jurors  shall  receive  their  fees,  and 
of  the  places  where   the   several    tribes  shall   respectively 
gather  in  the  court  for  this  purpose  when  their  duties  are 
completed  ;  the  object  being  that  the  jurors  may  be  broken 
up  into  small  groups  for  the  reception  of  their  pay,  and  not 
all  crowd  together  and  impede  one  another. 

67  These  preliminaries  being  concluded,  the  cases  are  called 
on.  If  it  is  a  day  for  private  cases,  the  private  litigants  are 
called.  Four  cases  are  taken  in  each  of  the  categories 

1  The  correct  reading  is  perhaps  '  the  five  officials '. 

CHAPTER    67 

defined  in  the  law,  and  the  litigants  swear  to  confine  their 
speeches  to  the  point  at  issue.  If  it  is  a  day  for  public 
causes,  the  public  litigants  are  called,  and  only  one  case 
is  tried.  Water-clocks  are  provided,  having  small  supply-  2 
tubes,1  into  which  the  water  is  poured  by  which  the 
length  of  the  pleadings  is  regulated.  Ten  gallons2  are 
allowed  for  a  case  in  which  an  amount  of  more  than  five 
thousand  drachmas  is  involved,  and  three  for  the  second 
speech  on  each  side.  When  the  amount  is  between  one  and 
five  thousand  drachmas,  seven  gallons  are  allowed  for  the 
first  speech  and  two  for  the  second  ;  when  it  is  less  than  one 
thousand,  five  and  two.  Six  gallons  are  allowed  for 
arbitrations  between  rival  claimants,  in  which  there  is  no 
second  speech.  The  official  chosen  by  lot  to  superintend  the  3 
water-clock  places  his  hand  on  the  supply-tube  whenever 
the  clerk  is  about  to  read  a  resolution  or  law  or  affidavit  or 
treaty.  When,  however,  a  case  is  conducted  according  to  a 
set  measurement  of  the  day,  he  does  not  stop  the  supply, 
but  each  party  receives  an  equal  allowance  of  water.3  The  4 
standard  of  measurement  is  the  length  of  the  days  in  the 

month   Poseideon 4 The  measured  day  is  5 

employed  in  cases  when  imprisonment,  death,  exile,  loss  of 
civil  rights,  or  confiscation  of  goods  is  assigned  as  the  penalty. 

Most  of  the  courts  consist  of  500  members  .  .  .   ;  and  68 
when  it  is  necessary  to  bring  public  cases  before  a  jury  of 
i  ,000  members,  two  courts  combine  for  the  purpose,  [while 
the  most  important  cases  of  all  are  brought  before]  1,500 
jurors,  or  three  courts.     The  ballot  balls  are  made  of  brass  a 

1  Or,   reading   av\ovs  re  e^ovtrat   mil  eKpovs,  with  Sandys,  '  having 
supply-tubes   and   outlets ' ;    but   it  is  difficult  to  say   that  water  is 
poured  into  an  outlet.      The  water  is  poured  in  through  the  supply- 
tube,  and  trickles  out  through  an  opening  at  the  bottom.      When  the 
aperture  at  the  top  is  closed,  the  water  ceases  to  run  out. 

2  The  x°i's  is  really  equivalent  to  about  three-quarters  of  a  gallon. 

3  In  ordinary  suits,  fixed  allowances  of  water  (i.  e.  of  time  as  measured 
by  the  water-clock)  were  given  for  each  speech,  and  the  time  occupied 
in  the  reading  of  affidavits,  &c.,  was  not  included  in  the  allowances,  so 
that  the  water-clock  was  stopped  while  they  were  read.     In    more 
important  cases  a  certain  portion  of  the  day  was  allotted  to  either  side, 
without  allowance  for  the  time  occupied  by  reading  documents. 

4  i.  e.  December  to  January,  when  the  days  are  shortest.    A  mutilated 
passage  follows. 

ATHENIENSIUM   RESPUBLICA 

with  stems  running  through  the  centre,  half  of  them  having 
the  stem  pierced  and  the  other  half  solid.  When  the 
speeches  are  concluded,  the  officials  assigned  to  the  taking 
of  the  votes  give  each  juror  two  ballot  balls,  one  pierced 
and  one  solid.  This  is  done  in  full  view  of  the  rival  litigants, 
to  secure  that  no  one  shall  receive  two  pierced  or  two  solid 
balls.  Then  the  official  designated  for  the  purpose  takes  away 
the  jurors'  staves,  in  return  for  which  each  one  as  he  records 
his  vote  receives  a  brass  voucher  marked  with  the  numeral  3 
(because  he  gets  three  obols  when  he  gives  it  up).  This  is 
to  ensure  that  all  shall  vote  ;  since  no  one  can  get  a  voucher 

3  unless  he  votes.     Two  urns,   one  of  brass  and  the  other 
of  wood,  stand  in  the  court,  in  distinct  spots  so  that  no  one 
may  surreptitiously  insert  ballot  balls  ;    in  these  the  jurors 
record  their  votes.     The  brazen  urn  is  for  effective  votes,1 
the  wooden  for  unused  votes ;  and  the  brazen  urn  has  a  lid 
pierced  so  as  to  take  only  one  ballot  ball,  in  order  that  no 
one  may  put  in  two  at  a  time. 

4  When  the  jurors  are.  about  to  vote,  the  crier  demands 
first  whether  the  litigants  enter  a  protest  against  any  of  the 
evidence;   for  no  protest  can  be  received  after  the  voting 
has  begun.     Then  he  proclaims  again,  '  The  pierced  ballot 
for  the  plaintiff,   the   solid    for   the   defendant ' ;   and  the 
juror,  taking  his  two  ballot  balls  from  the  stand,  with  his 
hand  closed  over  the  stem  so  as  not  to  show  either  the  pierced 
or  the  solid  ballot  to  the  litigants,  casts  the  one  which  is  to 
count  into  the  brazen  urn,  and  the  other  into  the  wooden  urn. 

g  When  all  the  jurors  have  voted,  the  attendants  take  the 
urn  containing  the  effective  votes  and  discharge  them  on  to 
a  reckoning  board  having  as  many  cavities  as  there  are 
ballot  balls,  so  that  the  effective  votes,  whether  pierced 
or  solid,  may  be  plainly  displayed  and  easily  counted. 
Then  the  officials  assigned  to  the  taking  of  the  votes  tell 
them  off  on  the  board,  the  solid  in  one  place  and  the  pierced 
in  another,  and  the  crier  announces  the  numbers  of  the 

1  i.  e.  those  which  record  the  juror's  actual  vote.  Each  juror  receives 
two  ballots,  and  uses  one  (pierced  or  solid  according  as  he  votes  for 
the  plaintiff  or  the  defendant)  to  record  his  vote,  and  throws  the  other 
away. 

CHAPTER   69 

votes,  the  pierced  ballots  being  for  the  prosecutor  and  the 
solid  for  the  defendant.  Whichever  has  the  majority  is  vic 
torious  ;  but  if  the  votes  are  equal  the  verdict  is  for  the 
defendant.  Then,  if  damages  have  to  be  awarded,  they  2 
vote  again  in  the  same  way,  first  returning  their  pay- 
vouchers  and  receiving  back  their  staves.  Half  a  gallon 
of  water  is  allowed  to  each  party  for  the  discussion  of  the 
damages.  Finally,  when  all  has  been  completed  in  accor 
dance  with  the  law,  the  jurors  receive  their  pay  in  the  order 
assigned  by  the  lot. 

INDEX 

References  are  to  chapters  and  sections. 

Acastus,  3,  3. 

Acherdus,  deme  of,  38,  3. 

Acropolis,  7,  4;  8,4;  14,1;  15,4;  18, 
3;  19,6;  20,3;  37,2;  55,  5;  60,3. 

Acte*  (south  shore  of  Piraeus),  42, 
3;  61,  i. 

Aegospotami,  battle  of,  34,  2. 

Agoranomi  (Market  Commission 
ers),  51,  I. 

Agroeci,  13,  2. 

Agyrrhius,  41,  3. 

Alcmeonidae,  i;  19,3;  20,2,4,5;  28,2. 

Alexias,  archon,  34,  2. 

Aliens,  jurisdiction  of  Polemarch 
over,  58,  3. 

Alopece,  deme  of,  22,  5  ;  45,  i. 

Ammonias,  sacred  trireme,  61,  7. 

Amphictyonic  deputies,  62,  2. 

Anacreon,  18,  I. 

Anaphlystus,  deme  of,  29,  I. 

Anchimolus,  19,  5. 

Angele,  deme  of,  34,  i . 

Anthemion,  7,  4. 

Antidotus,  archon,  26,  4. 

Antiphon,  32,  2. 

Anytus,  27,  5  ;  34,  3. 

Aphidna,  deme  of,  34,  3. 

Apodectae  (Receivers),  47,  5;   48, 

if  2J  5°;  52,3- 
Arbitrators,  53,  2-6  ;    58,  2  ;    oath 

of,  55,  5- 

Archestratus,  35,  2. 
Archinus  of  Ambracia,  17,  4. 
Archinus,  political  leader,  34,  3  ;  40, 

1,2. 

Archon,  the,  3,  2-3,  5  ;  60,  2,  3  ; 
constitutional  importance  of,  13, 
2  ;  functions  of,  56. 

Archon,  for  Salamis,  54,  8 ;  62,  2. 

Archons,  the  nine,  3  ;  4,  2  ;  7,  I,  3  ; 
8,  i,  2;  29,  5  ;  30,  2;  47,  2;  63, 
i  ;  64 ;  66,  i ;  election  of,  22, 
5 ;  26,  2  ;  55  ;  examination  of, 
45,  3  ;  oath  of,  55,  5  ;  pay  of,  62, 
2.  See  also  King-Archon.  Pole- 
march.  Thesmothetae. 

Archons,  in  Piraeus,  35,  I. 
Archons,  chronological  sequence  of, 

B.C. 

621  Aristaichmus,  4,  I. 

594  Solon,  5,  2. 

582  (?)  Damasias,  13,  2. 

560  Corneas,  14,  I. 

555  Hegesias,  14,  3. 

528  Philoneos,  17,  I. 

511   Harpactides,  19,  6. 

508  Isagoras,  21,  i. 

501   Hermocreon,  22,  2. 

490  Phaenippus,  22,  3. 

487  Telesinus,  22,  5. 

483  Nicodemus,  22,  7. 

481  Hypsichides,  22,  8. 

478  Timosthenes,  23,  5. 

462  Conon,  25,  2. 

457  Mnesitheides,  26,  2. 

453  Lysicrates  26,  3. 

451   Antidotus,  26,  4. 

432  Pythodorus  27,  2. 

412  Callias  32,  I,  2. 

[411  Mnasilochus,  33,  I.] 

411   Theopompus,  33,  I. 

406  Callias,  34,  I. 

405  Alexias,  34,  2. 

404  Pythodorus,  35,  I  ;  41,  I. 

403  Eucleides,  39,  I. 

401  Xenaenetus,  40,  4. 

329  Cephisophon,  54,  7. 
Archons,  ten,  13,2. 
Areopagus,  Council  of,  3,6;  4,  4  ; 

8,  2,  4;  16,  8  ;  23,   i  ;   25,  1-4; 

27,  i;  35.  2;   47,  2;    57,  3!   60, 

2,3- 
Arginusae,  battle  of,  34,  I. 

Argos,  17,  4  ;  19,  4- 
Aristaichmus,  archon,  4,  I. 
Aristides,  22,  7  ;    23,  3-5  ;    24,  3  : 

28,  2;  41,  2. 
Aristion,  14,  i. 
Aristocrates,  33,  2. 
Aristodicus,  of  Tanagra,  25,  4. 
Aristogeiton,  18,  2-6;  58,  i. 
Aristomachus,  32,  I. 

INDEX 

Artemis,  sacrifices  to,  58,  i. 
Asclepius,  procession  of,  56,  4. 
Assembly  (Ecclesia)  4,  3  ;  25,  2,  4  ; 

41,  2;  42,  4;  43,  3-6;  44,2,4; 

45,  4  ;  46,  I,  2  ;  49.  2  ;  54,  3,  5  ; 

pay  for,  41,2. 
Assessors,  to  Archons,   56,   I  ;    to 

Euthuni,  48,  4. 
Astynomi,  50. 
Athena,  14,  4  ;  robe  of  (peplus),  49, 

3 ;  60,  I . 

statue  of,  47,  i. 
Athens,  constitutions  of : 

Ion,  41,  2. 

Theseus,  3  ;  41,2. 

Draco,  4 ;  41,2. 

Solon,  5-12  ;  41,  2. 

Pisistratus,  14-16;  41,  2. 

Cleisthenes,  21  ;  41,  2. 

Areopagite,  23-25  ;  41,  2. 

Democracy,  26-28  ;  41,  2. 

Four  Hundred,  29-33  ;  41,  2. 

Democracy   restored,    33,    1-34 ; 
39-41,  2. 

Thirty,  34,  3-38  ;  41,  2. 
Athens,  empire  of,  24. 
Athlothetae      (Commissioners      of  ; 

Games),  60,  i,  3  ;  62,  2. 
Auditors,  48,  3  ;  54,  2. 

Brauronia,  festival  of,  54,  7. 

Bribery,  27,  5. 

Bucolium,  3,  5. 

Buildings,  public,  46,  2  ;  49,  3. 

Callias,  archon  (412-411  B.  C.),  32> 
I,  2. 

Callias, archon  (406-405  B.  C.),  34>  i- 

Callibius,  37,  2  ;  38,  2. 

Calibrates,  28,  3. 

Catalogeis  (Commissioners  of  En 
rolment),  49,  2. 

Cavalry,  examination  of,  49,  I,  2. 

Cedon,  20,  5. 

Cephisophon,  archon,  54,  7. 

Ceryces,  39,  2  ;  57,  i. 

Choregi,  54,  8;  56,  3,  4- 

Cimon,  26,  I  ;  27,  I,  3  ;  28,  2. 

Cineas,  of  Thessaly,  19,  5. 

City,  Commissioners  of,  50. 

Cleisthenes,  20,  1-22,  4;  28,2; 
29,  3;  41,  2. 

Cleitophon,  29,  3  ;  34,  3- 

Cleomenes,  19,  2,  5  ;  20,  2,  3. 

Cleon,  28,  3. 

Cleophon,  28,  3;  34,  i. 

Clerk  of  the  Council,  47,  5  ;  48,  I. 

—  of  the  Laws,  54,  4/ 

-  of  the  Prytany,  54,  3. 

-  Reading,  54,  5. 

—  to  Archons,  55,  I,  2. 

—  to  Thesmothetae,  55,  i  ;  59,  7  5 

63,  I- 
Clocks,    water,    in   law-courts,    67, 

2-5- 

Codrus,  3,  i,  note;  3,  3. 
Coinage,  Solon's  reform  of,  10. 
Colacretae,  7,  3. 
Colly tus,  deme  of,  14,  4  ;  22,  4. 
Corneas,  archon,  14,  i. 
Confederacy  of  Delos,  23,  5. 
Confiscated   properties,    47,    2,    3  ; 

52,  i. 

Conon,  archon,  25,  2. 
Contracts,  Commissioners  for,  47, 

2;  52,  I. 

Corn,  Commissioners,  51,  3. 
Council  of  500,  21,3;   22,  2 ;   25, 

2;    41,  2;    43,  2-49;    55,  2-4; 

membership  of,  62,  3 ;    pay  for, 

62,  2. 

—  of  500  (under  the  Thirty),  35,  I. 

—  of  400,  8,  4;  31. 
-of 401,  4,  3- 

Councils  under  constitution  of  t  our 

Hundred,  30. 
Cylon,  i,  note. 

Damasias,  archon,  13,  2. 

Damonides,  27,  4. 

Decelea,  34,  i. 

Delos,  festival  of,    54,    7 ;    56,  4 : 

missions  to,  62,  2. 
Delphi,  oracle  of,  19,  4  ;  21,6. 
Delphinium,  court  of,  57,  3. 
Demarchs,  21,  5 

—  for  Piraeus,  54,  8. 
Demaretus,  38,  2. 

Demes,  20, 4-6  ;  elections  by,  62,  I . 
Denies,  names  of: 

Anaphlystus,  29,  I. 

Angele,  34,  I. 

Aphidna,  34,  3. 

Collytus,  14,  4;  22,  4. 

Laciadae,  27,  3. 

Oia,  27,  4. 

Paeania,  14,  4;  28,  3;  38,  3. 
Demiurgi,  13,  2. 
Dionysia,     festival     of,     56,     3-5. 

Superintendents  of,  56,  4. 

—  Lenaean,  festival  of,  57,  i- 

—  in  Salamis  and  Piraeus,  54,  8. 
,   Diphilus,  7,  4. 

INDEX 

Draco,  legislation  of,  4 ;  7,  I  ;  41,  2. 
Dracontides,  34,  3. 

Eetioneia,  fort  of,  37,  I. 
Eisagogeis  (Introducers  of  Cases), 

52,  2;  58,  2. 

Elections  by  lot,  43,  i,  2;  44,  i  ; 
47,  i,  2;  48,  i,  3,  4;  So;  5i, 
1-4;  52,  i,  2;  53,  i  ;  54,  1-4, 
6-8;  55,  i  ;  56,  4;  60,  i  ;  62,  i. 
-  by  vote,  43,  i  ;  44,  4 ;  46,  i  ; 
49,  2;  54,  3,  5;  56,4;  57,  i  ; 
61,  i,3-7- 

Eleusinia,  festival  of,  54,  7. 

Eleusis,  39,  1-4  ;  40,  4. 

Eleven,  the  (Police  Commissioners), 

7,3;  29,4;  35,  i  J  39.5!  52,  i. 
Empectes  (Ticket-hanger),  64,  2,  3  ; 

65,3- 
Enrolment,  Commissioners  of,  49, 

2. 

Enyalius,  sacrifices  to,  58,  I. 
Ephebi,  examination  of,  42,    I,  2  ; 

53,  4;  training,  42,  2-5. 
Ephetae,  57,  4. 

Ephialtes,  25  ;  28,  2 ;    laws  of,  35, 

2;  41,  2. 
Epilyceum,  3,  5. 
Epimenides,  I. 
Eponymi    (eponymous   heroes),   of 

tribes,  21,  5  ;  48,  4  ;  53,  4- 
—  of  years  of  service,  53,  4-7. 
Eretria,  15,  2  ;  battle  of,  33,  I. 
Euboea,  33,  i. 
Eucleides,  archon,  39,  I. 
Eumelides,  45,  i. 
Eumolpidae,  39,  2;  57,  i. 
Eupatridae,  13,  2. 
Euthuni  (Examiners  of  Accounts), 

48,4. 

Examination  of  Magistrates,  45,  2, 

3;  48,  4,  51  55- 
Examiner  of  Accounts,  48,  4. 

Family  deities,  55,  3. 
Festivals,  Commissioners  for,  54,  7. 
Festivals,  quadriennial,  54,  7. 
Five  Thousand,  Assembly  of,   29, 

5  ;  30,  i  ;  31,  2,  3;  32,  I,  3;  33, 

i  5  34,  I- 

Forty,  the.    See  Justices,  Local. 
Four  Hundred,  constitution  of,  29- 

33- 
Four    Hundred,    Council  of,  8,  4  ; 

21,3;  31,  i ;  32,  i,  3- 

Franchise,   citizen,   4,  i  ;    7,  3,  4  ; 
21,  2  ;  26,  4;  42. 

Games,  Commissioners  of,  60,  1,3; 

62,  2. 

—  prizes  in,  60,  3. 
Geruestus,  22,  8. 
Gorgilus,  17,  4. 

Harmodius,  18,  2-4. 

and     Aristogeiton,     memorial 

offerings  to,  58,  I. 
Harpactides,  archon,  19,  6. 
,  Hectemori,  2,  2. 
Hegesias,  archon,  14,  3. 
Hegesistratus  (Thessalus),  17,  3. 
Hellenotamiae,  30,  2. 
Hephaestia,  festival  of,  54,  7. 
Heracleia,  festival  of,  54,  7. 
Heracleides,  of  Clazomenae,  41,  3. 
Hermocreon,  archon,  22,  2. 
Hieromnemon,  30,  2. 
Hieropoei  (Commissioners  of  Public 

Worship),  30,  2  ;  54,  6. 
Hipparchs,  4,  2 ;  30,  2 ;  31,  3;  49, 

2  ;  6l,  4 ;  election  of,  44,  4. 

—  for  Lemnos,  61,  6. 
Hipparchus,son  of  Charmus,  22,  4. 
Hipparchus,  son  of  Pisistratus,  17, 

3-1.8. 

Hippias,  son  of  Pisistratus,  17,  3- 

19,  5- 
Hodopoei        (Commissioners       of 

Roads),  54,  I. 

Homicide,  cases  of,  57,  3,  4. 
Horses,  state  examination  of,  49, 1,2. 
Hypsichides,  archon,  22,  8. 

Imbros,  magistrates  for,  62,  2. 
Introducers  of  Cases,  52,  2  ;  58,  2. 
Ion,  3,  2;  41,  2. 
lophon,  17,  3. 

Isagoras,  son  of  Tisander,  20,  1-3  ; 
21,  i  ;  28,  2. 

Jurors,  qualifications  of,  63,  3. 
Justices,  local,  16,  5  ;  26,  3 ;  48,  5  ; 

S3- 

King-Archon,  3,2,  3,  5;  47,4;  55,1; 

56,  I  ;  functions  of,  57. 
Knights,  4,  3  ;  7,  3,  4  ;  24,  3  ;  26,  2  ; 

38,2. 

Laciadae,  deme  of,  27,  3. 
Law-courts,  appeal  to,  42,  I  ;   45, 

1-3;  48,  4,  5!  49,  35  55,  2. 
—  jurisdiction  of,  52,  2;  53,  2,  3; 
54,  2;  55,  2,  4;  56,  6,  7;  61,  2. 
pay  for  service  in,  27,  3. 

INDEX 

Law-courts,  power  of,  9,  I  ;  35,  2 ; 

41,  2. 

-  procedure  in,  63-69. 
Laws,  Clerk  of,  54,  4. 
Law-suits,  categories  cf,  56,  6  ;  57, 

2-4  ;  58,  2  ;  59,  2,  3. 
Leaders   of  the  people  (irpoa-Tarr^s 

TOV  br)[jLov)  2,   2  ;    20,  4 ;  23,   3 ; 

25,  I  ;  28,  2,  3;  36,  I. 
Leinnos,    Hipparch     for,     61,    6 ; 

magistrates  for,  62,  2. 
Lenaea,  festival  of,  57,  I. 
Leocoreum,  18,  3. 
Lipsydrium,  19,  3. 
Lochagi,  6 1,  3. 

Logistae  (Auditors),  48,  3  ;  54,  2. 
Lot.     See  Elections. 
Lycurgus,  13,  4  ;  14,  3. 
Lygdamis,  tyrant  of  Naxos,  15,  2. 
Lysander,  34,  2,  3. 
Lysicrates,  archon,  26,  3. 
Lysimachus,  45,  I. 

Magistrates,   audit  of  accounts  of, 

48,  4  ;  54,  2. 

—  examination  of,  45,  2  ;  55  ;  59,  4. 
Marathon,  battle  of,  22,  3. 
Market,  Commissioners  of,  51,  I. 
Maroneia,  mines  of,  22,  7. 
Mart,  Superintendents  of,  51,  4. 
Medon,  3,  3. 
Megacles,  son  of  Alcmeon,  13,  4; 

14,  4. 

Megacles,  son  of  Hippocrates,  22,  5. 
Megara,  war  with,  14,  I  ;   17,  2. 
Melobius,  29,  i. 
Metronomi      (Commissioners       of 

Weights  and  Measures),  51,  2. 
Miltiades,  28,  2. 
Mnasilochus,  archon,  33,  i. 
Mnesitheides,  archon,  26,  2. 
'  Monthly  '  suits,  52,  2. 
Munichia,  19,  2  ;  38,  i  ;  42,  3  ;  61,  i. 
Musicians,  state  control  of,  50. 
Myron,  I. 
Mysteries,  Superintendents  of,  57,  i. 

Naucrari,  8,  3  ;  21,  5. 
Naucraries,  8,  3  ;  21,  5. 
Naxos,  15,  3. 
Nicias,  28,  2,  5. 
Nicodemus,  archon,  22,  7. 

Oaths,  on  a  stone,  7,  I  ;  55,  5. 
Oia,  deme  of,  27,  4. 
Olives,  sacred.  60,  2. 
Oreus,  33,  i. 

Orphans,  state  control  of,  56,  7. 
Ostracism,  22,  1-8;  27,  4  ;  43,  5. 

Paeania,  deme   of,    14,  4 ;    28,  3  ; 

38,  3- 

Palladium,  court  of,  57,  3. 
Pallene,  battle  of,  15,  3  ;  17,  4. 
Panathenaic  Festival,  18,2,3;  43, 1 ; 

49,  3  5  54,  7  ;  60,  i,  3  ;  62,  2. 
Pangaeus,  Mt.,  mines  of,  15,  2. 
Paralus,  sacred  trireme,  61,7. 
Paredri,  of  Archons,  56,  I . 

—  of  Euthuni,  48,  4. 
Paupers,  49,  4. 

Pausanias,  king  of  Sparta,  38,  3,  4. 
Pausanias,  regent  of  Sparta,  23,  4. 
Pay  for  public  service,  24,  3  ;  27,  3 ; 

62,  2. 

Pelatae  2,  2. 

Peloponnesian  War,  27,  2. 
Pentacosiomedimnus,  4,  3  ;  7,  3  ;  8, 

7;  26,  2;  47,  i. 
Pericles,  26,  4  ;  27,  1-28,  3. 
Persia,  king  of,  29,  I. 
Phaenippus,  archon,  22,  3. 
Phayllus,  38,  3. 
Philoneos,  archon,  17,  I. 
Phormisius,  34,  3. 
Phreatto,  court  of,  57, 3. 
Phye,  14,  4. 

Phylarchs,  30,  2  ;  31,3;  49,2;  61,  5. 
Phyle,  37,  i;  38,2;  41,2. 
Piraeus,  38,  3,  4 ;   39,  5  ;  40,  2,  3 ; 

42,  3;  61,  i. 

—  Archons  in,  35,  I. 

—  Commissioners  of,  50. 

—  Commissioners  of  Weights  and 
Measures  of,  51,  2. 

—  Corn  Commissioners  of,  51,  3. 

—  Demarch  for,  54,  8. 

—  Market  Commissioners  of,  51,  I. 
Pisander,  32,  2. 

Pisistratus,  13,  4;    14-17;    22,  3; 

28,2. 
Polemarch,  3,  2,  3,  5  ;  22,  2  ;  55,  I  ; 

56,  i  ;  functions  of,  58. 
Polemarcheum,  3,  5. 
Poletae,  7,  3  ;  47,  2  ;  52,  I. 
Prodromi  (scouts),  49,  I. 
Proedri,  44,  2,  3. 
Prytanes,  4,  2 ;    29,  4,   5  ;   41,  3  5 

43,  2-44  ;  45,  4  ;  62,  2. 
-  President  of,  44,  I,  3. 

Prytaneum,  3,  5  ;  24,  3  ;  62,  2. 

—  Court  of,  57,  4,  note. 
Prytany,  Clerk  of  the,  54,  3. 
Pylos,  27,  5. 

INDEX 

Pythia,  of  Delphi,  19,  4  ;  21,  6. 
Pythodorus,  archon  (432-431  B.C.), 

27,2. 
Pythodorus,  archon  (404-403  B.C.), 

35,  i  ;  41,  i. 

Pythodorus,  of  Anaphlystus,  29,  I. 
Quadriremes,  46,  i. 

Receivers-General,  47,  5  5  4$,  i ,  2  ; 

So;  52,3- 
Rhaicelus,  15,  2. 
Rhinon,  38,  3,  4, 
Roads,  Commissioners  of,  54,  I. 

Salamis,  archon  for,  54,  8  ;  62,  2. 
—  battle  of,  22,  7;  23,  i. 
Samos,  magistrates  for,  62,  2. 
Sanitation,  control  of,  50. 
Scouts,  49,  i. 
Scyllaeum,  22,  8. 
Scyros,  magistrates  for,  62,  2. 
Seal,  public,  44,  I. 
Seisachtheia,  6;   12,  4. 
Shipbuilding,  46. 
Sicily,  Athenian  defeat  in,  29,  I. 
Simonides,  18,  i. 
Sitophylaces  (Corn  Commissioners), 

51,  3. 
Solon,  5-14  ;  17,  2  ;    22,  i  ;   28,  2  ; 

laws  of,  7-10  ;  35,  2  ;   poetry  of, 

5,2,  3;    12. 

Sophronistae  (guardians),  42,  2,  3. 
Sparta,  19,  2,  4-6 ;  23,  2,  4;  37,  2  ; 

Springs,  Superintendent  of,  43,  I. 
Strategi,  4,  2  ;  22,  2  ;  26,  i  ;  30,  2  ; 
31,  2  ;  61,1,2;  election  of,  44,  4. 
Symmories,  61,  I. 

'Tax-Free  Farm  ',  16,  6. 
Taxiarchs,  30,  2  ;  6 1,  3. 
Telesimus,  archon,  22,  5. 
Temples,  Commissioners  for  repair 

of,  50. 

Ten,  the  (first  board  of),  38,  i ;  39,  5. 
Ten,  the  (second  board  of),  38,  3. 
Thargelia,  festival  of,  56,  3,  5. 
Theatre,  pay  for  attendance  at,  28.  3. 
Thebes,  15.  2. 

Themistocles,  22.  7  ;  23,  3  ;  25,  3, 

4;    28,  2. 

Theopompus,  archon,  33,  I. 
Theoric   Fund,  Commissioners  of, 

43,  i  ;  47,  2. 
Theramenes,  28,  3,  5  ;  32,  2  ;   33, 

2  ;  34,  3;  36,  I,  2;  37,  I,  2. 
Theseum,  15,  4 ;  62,  I. 
Thesmothetae,  3,  4 ;  45,  I  ;  48,  5  ; 

52,  i  ;    functions  of,  59 :    63,  4. 

See  also  Archons. 
Thesmotheteum,  3,  5. 
Thessalus,  17,  3  ;   18,  i. 
Thctes,  7,  3,  4. 
Thirty,  the,  34,  2  ;  35-4°- 
Tholus,  43,  3;  44,1- 
Thrasybulus,  37,  I  ;  40,  2. 
Three     Thousand,      Assembly     of 

(under  the  Thirty),  36,  I,  2  ;  37,  I. 
Thucydides,  28,  2,  5. 
Ticket-hangers,  64,  2,  3. 
Timonassa,  17,  4. 
Timosthenes,  archon,  23,  5. 
Treasurers,  4,  2  ;  7,  3  ;  8,  I  ;  3°,  2  ; 

60,  3. 

-  Military,  43,  I  ;  47,  2  ;  49,  3- 
—  of  Ammonias  and  Paralus,  6l,  7. 

—  of  Athena,  47,  I. 
Tribe-kings,  8,  3  ;  41,  2;  57,  4- 
Tribes,  four,  8,  3  ;  41,  2. 

—  ten,  21,2;  election  by,  8,  i ;  43, 
2;  44,  2  ;  47,  I,  2  ;  48,  I,  3,  4; 
52,  2;  53.  i  ;  56,  3;  60,  i  ;  6l,  i, 
3 ;     62,     i  ;     tribal    division    of 
jurors,  63-69, passim. 

Trierarchs,  61,  I. 
Triremes,  22,  7  ;  46. 
Trittyes,  8,3;  21,  3,4. 

!  Victory,  figures  of,  47,  I  I  49,  3- 

Wards  of  state,  42,  5  ;  43,  4  I  56-.7- 
Weights  and   Measures,    Commis 
sioners  of,  51,  2. 

—  Solon's  reform  of,  10. 
Worship,  Commissioners  of,  54,  6. 

Xanthippus,    son  of  Ariphron,   22, 

6 ;  28,  2. 
Xenaenetus,  archon,  40,  4. 

Zeugites,  4,  3  :  7-  3,  4  ;  26,  2. 

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 

HB 

Aristoteles 

77 

C0economica.  English. 

A73 

1920., 

1920 

Oeconomica 

iHIBJiB
